[Amit Varma]: I.V.M.
[Amit Varma]: by putting an end to Article 370.
[Amit Varma]: But what is this argument even?
[Amit Varma]: The Kashmir issue is at one level a geopolitical dispute between India and Pakistan, and even
[Amit Varma]: there the nature and incentives and priorities of both sides have changed over the years
[Amit Varma]: and so has what they have been fighting for.
[Amit Varma]: It is also a moral question about the right of the people of Kashmir to decide their own
[Amit Varma]: destiny.
[Amit Varma]: But even there nuances exist, and one man's freedom fighter is another man's terrorist.
[Amit Varma]: There is also the question of means and ends, where even a nationalist who agrees with India's
[Amit Varma]: ends may disagree with the means used to get there.
[Amit Varma]: The troubled history of Kashmir definitely does not end here.
[Amit Varma]: All we can do at this moment is take a look back in time and take stock.
[Unknown]: Welcome to the scene and the unseen, our weekly podcast on economics, politics and behavioral
[Unknown]: science.
[Amit Varma]: Please welcome your host, Amit Badma.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to the scene and the unseen.
[Amit Varma]: We are recording this on August 16, one day after India celebrated the 72nd anniversary
[Amit Varma]: of its Independence Day, although Kashmir didn't.
[Amit Varma]: For one thing, Kashmir did not join the Indian Union on August 15, 1947.
[Amit Varma]: For another, the whole state has been in virtual lockdown since Article 370 was done away with
[Amit Varma]: on August 5th.
[Amit Varma]: There's no doubt that this is a big turning point in our history, not just of Kashmir,
[Amit Varma]: but also of India.
[Amit Varma]: My guest today is a historian Srinath Raghavan, with whom I've done three fascinating episodes
[Amit Varma]: before, all of which will be linked from the show notes, and all of which are in some way
[Amit Varma]: or the other germane to our discussion today.
[Amit Varma]: But before I begin my conversation with him, let's take a quick commercial break.
[Amit Varma]: This episode of the scene and the unseen is brought to you by Storytel.
[Amit Varma]: Storytel is an audiobook platform which you can listen to on your Android or iOS app.
[Amit Varma]: They have thousands of audiobooks that you can listen to on your mobile, including hundreds
[Amit Varma]: in local languages like Hindi and Marathi.
[Amit Varma]: An unlimited monthly subscription costs only rupees 2.99 per month.
[Amit Varma]: And you can also get a 30 day free trial if you hop on over to Storytel.com slash IBM.
[Amit Varma]: I actually use Storytel myself regularly.
[Amit Varma]: So as long as they sponsor the show, I'm going to recommend one book a week that I love.
[Amit Varma]: The book I want to recommend today is a book of short stories called Men Without Women
[Amit Varma]: by Haruki Murakami.
[Amit Varma]: The first time I discovered Murakami, in fact, was when I read a story of his the second
[Amit Varma]: bakery attack in Playboy in the 1990s.
[Amit Varma]: Yes, that's right.
[Amit Varma]: I read Playboy for the stories.
[Amit Varma]: Men Without Women only on Storytel.
[Amit Varma]: And remember, you get a 30 day free trial only at Storytel.com slash IBM.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to the scene and the unseen Srinath.
[Amit Varma]: Good to be back here.
[Amit Varma]: Srinath, in your book, War and Peace in Modern India, you quote Mukul Kesavan near the start
[Amit Varma]: where he basically says, quote, all postmortems simplify historical choices and thus exaggerate
[Amit Varma]: the stupidity or insensitivity or wickedness of actors who in retrospect, seem to make
[Amit Varma]: the wrong ones, stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And where I found your book interesting, and I wanted to start with the narrative you which
[Amit Varma]: you've laid out in your book, is that that book is essentially about the choices made
[Amit Varma]: by India and in particular Nehru, who was a prime minister, examining his worldview
[Amit Varma]: and his incentives.
[Amit Varma]: And I found it really fascinating.
[Amit Varma]: And that's a good place to begin this because Kashmir is part of the story.
[Amit Varma]: But I think it makes more sense to really begin with Jawaharlal Nehru.
[Amit Varma]: Tell me a bit about how he looked at foreign policy.
[Guest]: Well, of all the leaders in the Indian national movement, you know, in the first half of the
[Guest]: 20th century, I think it's fair to say that Jawaharlal Nehru was possibly the one who
[Guest]: wanted to understand India's independence movement, its struggle for freedom from British
[Guest]: colonialism in a wider international context.
[Guest]: And that was something that Nehru, especially from the 1920s onwards, was very keen to understand
[Guest]: India's struggle for independence as part of a larger sort of movement towards, you
[Guest]: know, end of colonial empires, self-determination for people, rise of hitherto oppressed sort
[Guest]: of countries and so on.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: And, and he did this in a series of books, including his autobiography, which has reflections
[Guest]: of his engagement with the anti-fascist struggles of the 1930s, the anti-imperialist sort of,
[Guest]: you know, discussions happening beyond India in that period.
[Guest]: And in that sense, Jawaharlal Nehru was someone who was quite interested in issues of the
[Guest]: intersection between history and foreign policy in amongst the nationalist leaders.
[Guest]: And it is not surprising, therefore, that he chose to keep the foreign affairs portfolio
[Guest]: with himself when India first became independent.
[Amit Varma]: And again, I'll quote from your book, and I found these quotes particularly interesting,
[Amit Varma]: and I'll ask you to elaborate where you write, quote, in his understanding of the role of
[Amit Varma]: force in international relations, Nehru stood at the juncture of the liberal and realist
[Amit Varma]: traditions.
[Amit Varma]: Like many liberals, he abhorred war for its inherently illiberal effects and consequences,
[Amit Varma]: and yet maintained that, and now these are his words, in this imperfect world, a national
[Amit Varma]: state will have to use force to defend itself against unprovoked attack from outside.
[Amit Varma]: End of quote.
[Amit Varma]: And again, then you go on to say, by the early 1930s, Nehru's liberal idealism had morphed
[Amit Varma]: into liberal realism, kind of sort of elaborate on this a little bit.
[Amit Varma]: And also, how did he become a realist when the people around him weren't in a sense?
[Guest]: Well, it's interesting, right?
[Guest]: Because these a lot of the debates around the role of coercion in politics is something
[Guest]: that Nehru has not just with his colleagues in the Congress Party, but with a much wider
[Guest]: circle.
[Guest]: He writes about these things in his writings in that period, primarily because that is
[Guest]: a period when the Great Depression is coming on, that is a period when the sort of Spanish
[Guest]: Civil War has begun, when the role of force both in terms of the relations between classes
[Guest]: within countries, as well as between states is front and center.
[Guest]: And Nehru wants to acknowledge that this is a reality, that this is not a reality, despite
[Guest]: India's adherence to Gandhian sort of principles of nonviolence, the fact that means matter
[Guest]: as much as ends, etc.
[Guest]: He was not willing to sort of give up on the idea that in a world where you do not have
[Guest]: a world government, where entities are still sovereign, there is actually no limit on the
[Guest]: use of force as far as states pursuit of what they define to be their national interest
[Guest]: is concerned.
[Guest]: And in this, interestingly enough, Nehru's ideas, I think, were most strongly shaped
[Guest]: by the writings of the American theologian Reinhold Niebuhr.
[Guest]: And Niebuhr's book, Moral Man, Immoral Society, is something that Nehru read at that point
[Guest]: of time.
[Guest]: He read that book, and he even quotes from it in his autobiography, you know, and he
[Guest]: says that there is a fascinating contrast that he makes between Gandhi and Niebuhr.
[Guest]: And in fact, Niebuhr's own book talks about Gandhi, right?
[Guest]: So these were global debates.
[Guest]: This is not something just happening in India.
[Guest]: The question of violence and nonviolence means and ends were things that I think many people
[Guest]: in the Indian national movement grappled with it.
[Guest]: And Nehru was particularly keen to grapple with it in the context of India's relationship
[Guest]: with other countries, not just relations between class, classes within a country, but beyond
[Guest]: it as well.
[Guest]: And in that sense, Nehru had to reconcile his, on the one hand, what I say as his sort
[Guest]: of liberal instincts.
[Guest]: And I must say that, you know, Jawaharlal Nehru is not a classical liberal in the straightforward
[Guest]: sense of the word.
[Guest]: He was much more of a socialist.
[Guest]: But he did believe that individual liberties and constitutionally guaranteed freedoms,
[Guest]: etc., were quite important.
[Guest]: And that societies had to build on it and transcend them, go beyond them, in fact.
[Guest]: So to that extent, he knew that the use of force automatically, in most contexts, meant
[Guest]: the abridgement of the sort of fundamental rights of other peoples.
[Guest]: But at the same time, he felt that you could not forsake those things ab initio in a way
[Guest]: that Gandhi wanted to.
[Guest]: In fact, this debate really gets accelerated during the Second World War.
[Guest]: And I think in our episode, the last time we may even have spoken a bit about this,
[Guest]: which is to say that, at the height of the war, you know, in 1940-41, Gandhi wants the
[Guest]: Congress Party to pass a resolution saying independent India will not have any armed
[Guest]: forces that we will forswear the use of violence and coercion in existing and rest of the Congress
[Guest]: leaders led by Jawaharlal Nehru say that, you know, that's just not possible.
[Guest]: We cannot, in the context of what is happening in the world around us, actually assume that.
[Guest]: But at the same time, Nehru is constantly grappling with this Gandhian injunction that
[Guest]: means matter as much as sense.
[Guest]: And in that sense, he remains true to that Gandhian tenet and is constantly wrestling
[Guest]: with it.
[Guest]: And in some ways, the practical choices which had to be made in independent India fell on
[Guest]: him.
[Guest]: It did not fall on Gandhi, it did not even fall on Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel beyond a
[Guest]: point nor to any of the other Gandhians and, you know, leaders of the Congress Party.
[Guest]: It fell to Nehru to make these difficult choices in the concrete circumstances of the time.
[Guest]: And it was these choices that I set out to examine in the book that I was writing then.
[Amit Varma]: No, and you mentioned Nehru and you've also sort of quoted Nehru in his autobiography
[Amit Varma]: where he's talking about Nehru and I'll give Nehru's quote here, which is, quote,
[Amit Varma]: all life is full of conflict and violence, neither the growth of reason, nor of the religious
[Amit Varma]: outlook nor morality have checked in any way this tendency to violence, stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And again, you know, you quote Nehru later talking about nonviolence and placing it in
[Amit Varma]: sort of an instrumental frame, where he says, quote, it could only be a policy and a method
[Amit Varma]: promising certain results.
[Amit Varma]: And by those results, it would have to be finally judged, which is fairly interesting
[Amit Varma]: in contrast to Gandhi, obviously, because Gandhi also famously asked the British to
[Amit Varma]: use nonviolence to fight the Germans and so on and so forth.
[Amit Varma]: And like you said, Nehru sort of had to deal with the practical reality of being prime
[Amit Varma]: minister, but as you point out that a lot of his thinking was really shaped well before
[Amit Varma]: he took office, where he was already a liberal realist in a manner of speaking.
[Amit Varma]: And the other sort of thing I kind of noticed is that the key tussle that is happening in
[Amit Varma]: the early days of the Indian Union when, you know, they're struggling to get all the states
[Amit Varma]: and they're dealing with Junagadh, Hyderabad, Kashmir, the problem in Bengal and all that
[Amit Varma]: is that Nehru is also fighting with his own cabinet a lot.
[Amit Varma]: You know, tell me a bit about that.
[Amit Varma]: Is it simply a matter of position that by virtue of being the guy who makes the final
[Amit Varma]: decision, the prime minister, he has to be more responsible, and that shapes his behavior?
[Amit Varma]: Or were there fundamental philosophical differences as well?
[Guest]: Well, you know, once the Indian independence starts coming closer and closer in time, you
[Guest]: know, the government of India understands that actually the very big problem which they
[Guest]: had not applied their minds to was this question of what is going to happen to the so called
[Guest]: princely states, more than 540 of them existed of varying sizes, you know, stuff ranging
[Guest]: from very small villages to the states of Jammu and Kashmir or Hyderabad, which were
[Guest]: amongst the richest sort of entities, even in any international comparison.
[Guest]: And in that context, that was an issue which had been left towards the very end, because
[Guest]: the main issue of partitioning of the two countries of Punjab and Bengal, all of these
[Guest]: had to be stopped.
[Guest]: And that's where much of the political airtime had been sucked out of.
[Guest]: And so the issue of states had to be done in very fast order.
[Guest]: And it was in that context that, you know, they came up with this idea that, you know,
[Guest]: you want to have two broad principles to decide how states should make their own choices.
[Guest]: Now, just to sort of wind back a little, the relationship between the princely states and
[Guest]: the government of India was not one of direct subordination, right?
[Guest]: They had various forms of treaty arrangements.
[Guest]: And there was a sort of a vague catch all phrase called paramountcy, which was used
[Guest]: to describe the role of British India vis-a-vis these states, British India is a paramount
[Guest]: power.
[Guest]: But these states had some varying degrees of autonomy in the way that they organize
[Guest]: themselves internally, and so on, right?
[Guest]: So at the time of partition, when you had to decide the problem of princely states,
[Guest]: the way that the solution was come up was to say that states should decide whether they
[Guest]: want to accede to India or to Pakistan, depending broadly on their geographic contiguity, and
[Guest]: on the sort of nature of the populations, right?
[Guest]: So if you had a Hindu majority state, and you are smack in the middle of India, you
[Guest]: know, for you to imagine that you're going to go to Pakistan would not be a viable solution.
[Guest]: That was a problem of Hyderabad, right?
[Guest]: Whereas if you were a Muslim majority province, which adjoined Pakistan, then the assumption
[Guest]: was that you should opt to go to Pakistan, which was a problem of Kashmir.
[Guest]: And then you had something like Junagadh, where there was a Muslim ruler in a broadly
[Guest]: Hindu populace.
[Guest]: And even though there was not enough geographic contiguity, he was being wooed by them because
[Guest]: he had access to Karachi by way of a port.
[Guest]: So you know, there are many, many ways in which things could happen.
[Guest]: So these three states, particularly Junagadh, Hyderabad, and Kashmir, more or less come
[Guest]: on to the agenda of the government of India, practically on the day of independence itself,
[Guest]: because the Nawab of Junagadh decides to accede to Pakistan.
[Guest]: So his accession has to be turned around, but then he is within his rights to accede.
[Guest]: So the question then becomes how you sort of going to deal with this problem.
[Guest]: The government of India had already been dealing with the Nizam of Hyderabad, who had asked
[Guest]: for more time to come to some kind of an agreement with the Indian Union.
[Guest]: So that was a problem which is being settled.
[Guest]: And Kashmir, actually, the Maharaja was very unsure.
[Guest]: He was himself a Hindu ruler, but majority of his population was Muslim.
[Guest]: Most of the geographic contiguity at that point of time actually was with Pakistan.
[Guest]: It's something that we tend to forget.
[Guest]: Most of the lines of communication between Kashmir state and British India was actually
[Guest]: running through parts of Punjab, which later became Pakistan.
[Amit Varma]: And what you also pointed out that at one point when the boundaries were drawn, there
[Amit Varma]: was no contiguity with India at all.
[Amit Varma]: And later on, Gurdaspur was given to us and that's what there is.
[Guest]: I mean, so those were part of the things, you know, and there is a large historiography,
[Guest]: which basically is one of those retrospective readings, right?
[Guest]: To say that, oh, this was done in order to facilitate India's sort of, I don't think
[Guest]: those things hold up.
[Guest]: There are many arguments around those, we don't need to get detained by those.
[Guest]: But I think the point to be made is that these three issues were there.
[Guest]: And it was actually in the context of Junagadh, a state which had Muslim majority.
[Guest]: And let's also not forget, it was Junagadh, you know, is very much part of today's Gujarat.
[Guest]: Vallabhbhai Patel had a personal interest in those areas.
[Guest]: And in order to sort of make sure that the accession of Junagadh to Hyderabad was retracted,
[Guest]: the offer was made that the Indian government would allow for self-determination by way
[Guest]: of a referendum stroke plebiscite in each of these disputed areas.
[Guest]: It was taken not with respect to Kashmir, but actually first announced with respect
[Guest]: to Junagadh and said that we are willing to make this applicable as a principle to everything,
[Guest]: provided Pakistan is willing to sort of adopt the same attitude, right?
[Guest]: So it is in that context, really, that the issue of a referendum stroke plebiscite happens.
[Guest]: And just to remind our listeners that ultimately Junagadh was annexed by India by force, right?
[Guest]: The Indian army went in, overthrew the Nawab of Junagadh.
[Guest]: But a referendum was held, which overwhelmingly, quite naturally, went in favor of India.
[Guest]: In the context of Hyderabad, again, India had to use force to sort of take control of
[Guest]: the state.
[Guest]: But no referendum was held.
[Guest]: What did happen subsequently was that a general election was held and the other thing.
[Guest]: Kashmir was the one where the issue of referendum came to be entangled in a much wider international
[Guest]: context, which is why we tend to remember.
[Guest]: So we, when we look back, we think there were plebiscite, why only for Kashmir, right?
[Guest]: Actually, it was not only for Kashmir.
[Guest]: It was the policy of taking a plebiscite was taken on the basis of these things.
[Guest]: And again, as you point out, there were many discussions within the Indian cabinet and
[Guest]: the defense committee of the cabinet on what is the right measure to do these things.
[Guest]: There were disagreements in terms of emphasis between various leaders, not just, you know,
[Guest]: the fault line was not always between Nehru and Patel, as we today tend to imagine.
[Guest]: There were actually many other cabinet ministers who had a say.
[Guest]: Lord Mountbatten played a fairly important role in these discussions as governor general
[Guest]: and as chair of the defense committee of the cabinet.
[Guest]: So it was a much more open set of discussions in which I don't think the fault lines ran
[Guest]: just between Patel and Nehru.
[Guest]: Actually it did not.
[Guest]: On some of the more core issues, they agreed with each other.
[Guest]: On other issues, they did not.
[Guest]: But these were discussed as they would be discussed in any cabinet meeting where you
[Guest]: have a first amongst equals kind of position for the prime minister.
[Guest]: And decisions were arrived at by consensus.
[Amit Varma]: You know, just to sort of go back to 47 itself, and the thing is, when paramouncy ended, there
[Amit Varma]: was even a dispute about whether the princely states could go for independence, where India,
[Amit Varma]: as you pointed out, they feared a balkanization that, you know, too many people will claim
[Amit Varma]: independence.
[Amit Varma]: So they said, no, they have to join one or the other.
[Amit Varma]: And on the other hand, Jinnah was saying, no, no, they can go independent if they want,
[Amit Varma]: because he wants to mess with India, obviously, and it's, you know, advantages for him from
[Amit Varma]: a strategic point of view for to encourage independence, as in fact, he did in the case
[Amit Varma]: of Hyderabad and, and even Junagadh, I think that Junagadh acceded to Pakistan formally.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: At that point, yeah.
[Amit Varma]: And Shahnawaz Bhutto went and then kind of took over and all that.
[Amit Varma]: So tell me a little bit about what exactly happened in Junagadh then, because these decisions
[Amit Varma]: really also then impact what eventually happens in Kashmir after that.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: So as I said, I mean, in the case of Junagadh, as you're pointing out, basically, the Pakistani
[Guest]: secured attempted to secure the accession of the state.
[Guest]: And it then fell upon India to sort of persuade the Nawab of Junagadh to roll back.
[Guest]: And there were attempts made to sort of suggest to him that, you know, this was not something
[Guest]: which was a viable proposition.
[Guest]: Junagadh state itself was embedded in a number of other states in Saurashtra.
[Guest]: You know, it was a very fragmented kind of, it is a mosaic, literally.
[Guest]: I mean, if you look at the map of the princely states of Saurashtra back then, it's literally
[Guest]: like a mosaic and Junagadh is there.
[Guest]: But you know, what happens in Junagadh has consequences for other adjoining provinces,
[Guest]: many of whom were not desirous of joining Pakistan.
[Guest]: And as I said, Junagadh being part of what we would today call Gujarat have meant that
[Guest]: there was a strong sort of nationalist element involved, Patel himself was very closely sort
[Guest]: of interested in as incidentally was Gandhi, yeah, Gandhi came from Kadiabad.
[Guest]: And you know, and one of his Gandhi's nephews, a man called Samal Das Gandhi, Samal Das Gandhi
[Guest]: was the one who was leading the so called provisional government of Junagadh, which
[Guest]: sort of Darzi hukumat, which was set up to contest the legitimacy of the Nawab.
[Amit Varma]: Which Pakistan claimed was India's people and India said, No, we had nothing to do with
[Guest]: these guys.
[Guest]: So it is one of those kinds of situations, right.
[Guest]: And so the Indians effectively then had to, you know, to put no finer point on it, use
[Guest]: military force to annex Junagadh.
[Guest]: And a similar sort of move was made with respect to Hyderabad.
[Guest]: Now, the point to remember is that at this point of time, the most important consideration
[Guest]: for the government of India was to secure the unity of India in the aftermath of partition.
[Guest]: And that was a overriding consideration.
[Guest]: And that overriding consideration in some ways also fed into the constitutional vision
[Guest]: for independent India itself.
[Guest]: The constitution of India envisages the Indian Union as a unitary state, it does not envisage
[Guest]: it as a federal state.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: And there was a good reason because they did not want to give any kind of sovereign powers
[Guest]: even to federating units, even in a sort of hypothetical sense.
[Guest]: They wanted to make sure that this remains a unitary.
[Guest]: So the maintaining the unity of the country was not just a ideological project in a sense
[Guest]: of all nationhoods wanting a homeland to be unified, but was a practical necessity.
[Guest]: Because Indians believe that if you let go of, if Hyderabad could sort of claim independence
[Guest]: sitting in the middle of India or Junagadh could do something, then everybody else is
[Guest]: going to be emboldened to make similar kinds of claims, which would then weaken the Union
[Guest]: of India itself.
[Guest]: And we must understand that the Congress Party and the rest of the Indian nationalist movement
[Guest]: had rejected the cabinet mission plan, which actually called for a confederation kind of
[Guest]: solution between India and Pakistan with a very weak center.
[Guest]: They wanted a strong center, because you believe that until India had a strong central government,
[Guest]: development would suffer, that we needed to sort of really push these things through.
[Guest]: So there were many reasons for a unitary, strong centralized state being the desired
[Guest]: outcome.
[Guest]: And having actually accepted partition to get that, they were in no mood to allow the
[Guest]: princely states to wreck the party.
[Amit Varma]: So essentially what happened and we obviously got our constitution in Jan 1950.
[Amit Varma]: In 1947, what happened was there was something called the Indian Independence Act, which
[Amit Varma]: empowered the Governor General of India, which was then Mountbatten to adapt the Government
[Amit Varma]: of India Act of 1935, as an interim constitution, and then to negotiate with each of the princely
[Amit Varma]: states to get them to accede.
[Amit Varma]: In the end, it turns out Kashmir was the only one which really negotiated.
[Amit Varma]: You know, the rest sort of happened through other means in the case of Junagadh and Hyderabad,
[Amit Varma]: as you point out, virtually through, I mean, we just sent our army there and basically
[Amit Varma]: took over.
[Amit Varma]: But with Kashmir, on the other hand, there was an instrument of accession signed on October
[Amit Varma]: 26, 1947, which also pointed out that this was provisional until the will of the people
[Amit Varma]: was ascertained.
[Amit Varma]: What was the politics that was playing out during this time between India and Pakistan
[Amit Varma]: and you know, the Maharaja of Kashmir, Hari Singh, and Sheikh Abdullah, who was at that
[Amit Varma]: time, head of the National Conference?
[Guest]: So I think there are two or three issues that, you know, I think we just need to separate
[Guest]: out.
[Guest]: The first point, just a preliminary one in response to what you said earlier, you know,
[Guest]: as far as Hyderabad is concerned, actually, there were very prolonged negotiations running
[Guest]: for almost 10 months.
[Guest]: You know, I think actually with Hyderabad, you had the longest sets of negotiations.
[Guest]: It's only when those negotiations failed, that India decided to use force, right?
[Guest]: So whereas with Junagadh, the use of force was much quicker, it happened in much shorter
[Guest]: order.
[Guest]: So that's just to sort of put that point there.
[Guest]: Leaving that aside, right?
[Guest]: Now, the instrument of accession itself was a legal instrument, which was devised by VP
[Guest]: Menon, who was the Secretary of the Ministry of States and the person who worked most closely
[Guest]: with the Minister of State, which was Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel, to gain accession.
[Guest]: And what Menon and Patel, and of course, the rest of government of India after consultations,
[Guest]: decided was that instead of trying to get into protracted negotiations between with
[Guest]: each of the states about what their exact relationship with the Indian Union is going
[Guest]: to be, the first thing is to secure their addition to the Union on minimal terms.
[Guest]: And then we can figure out things later about what we want to do.
[Guest]: So the instrument of accession, therefore, was a modified instrument actually from the
[Guest]: Government of India Act.
[Guest]: And they just used it to say, sign up with us for just giving us control over three subjects,
[Guest]: defence, foreign affairs and communications, I mean, road, whatever, telephone, telegraphic
[Guest]: communications and so on.
[Guest]: And that for the rest, the states have all the residual powers, the rest with the states
[Guest]: themselves, right?
[Guest]: And then over a period of time, many other states were persuaded to accept all provisions
[Guest]: of the Constitution and merge effectively with the Indian Union.
[Guest]: Others like Hyderabad, which resisted even instrument of accession, were then sort of
[Guest]: brought to heel by the use of force.
[Guest]: With Kashmir, as you're saying, at the time when the instrument of accession was signed,
[Guest]: the Government of India, Lord Mountbatten on behalf of as Governor General also announced
[Guest]: that a, the wishes of the people will be sort of ascertained ultimately about the future
[Guest]: of Kashmir.
[Guest]: Kashmir, as I said, was a pledge which had originally been made with respect to all the
[Guest]: outstanding problems and was not something which was specially crafted for Kashmir.
[Guest]: But it was something that was announced at that point of time that this is something
[Guest]: that India is committed to doing, which is to give the people of Kashmir a chance to
[Guest]: determine their own wishes about whether they want to be with India or to be with Pakistan.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, one of the interesting themes through your book was Nehru's reluctance to
[Amit Varma]: use violence at any point because he sensibly realized that the unintended consequences
[Amit Varma]: are harsh.
[Amit Varma]: And perhaps, you know, perhaps after seeing what happened during partition and the communal
[Amit Varma]: violence that broke out, he also had a fear that any use of violence by the state in any,
[Amit Varma]: you know, whether it's in Hyderabad or whether it's in Junagadh or Kashmir or whatever, could
[Amit Varma]: have subsequent repercussions in the rest of the country and end up in communal violence.
[Amit Varma]: And what's interesting to me with the context of Hyderabad was that Nehru essentially took
[Amit Varma]: a hands-off approach and didn't really want to use violence, just wanted to negotiate
[Amit Varma]: his way to a settlement.
[Amit Varma]: But his hand was forced by the violence used by the Razakars, right, which were the sort
[Amit Varma]: of the militant wing of the fundamentalist party out there.
[Amit Varma]: And ultimately, you know, the Razakars just sort of carried out so many attacks and so
[Amit Varma]: much violence that Nehru's hand was forced.
[Amit Varma]: The interesting counterfactual here is what happens if the Razakars don't carry out all
[Amit Varma]: of that violence and Hyderabad nevertheless refuses to accede to the Indian Union, where
[Amit Varma]: do you think that would have gone?
[Guest]: Well, it's an interesting counterfactual question.
[Guest]: And I think the answer will turn on what we think the Nizam of Hyderabad was willing or
[Guest]: not willing to do irrespective of the Razakar violence.
[Guest]: And it is a fact that the Nizam of Hyderabad was staking out for a very maximalist position,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: He wanted some kind of a agreement between India and this thing and an agreement of that
[Guest]: kind would be effectively an agreement under international law of the kind say that India
[Guest]: signed with states like Sikkim, right, which was until 1975, not part of the Indian Union.
[Guest]: And he in fact, also wanted access to have a land corridor leading up to a port on Western
[Guest]: India and so on and so forth, right?
[Guest]: And he had fairly grandized plans and was quite unrealistic.
[Guest]: So my sense is that even if the Razakar violence had not happened, I do not think it would
[Guest]: have been possible to come to any kind of an agreement which would have satisfied both
[Guest]: sides very easily.
[Guest]: And even without the Razakar violence, I think the government of India would eventually have
[Guest]: had to use force, if that's what it came down to.
[Guest]: What the Razakar issue did was to give them a justification, which was quite convenient
[Guest]: to explain why their action had to take place and they explained it as a breakdown of sort
[Guest]: of law and order, which there was to be fair.
[Guest]: But that that could do it so so I don't think the Hyderabad issue would have led to a non
[Guest]: violent solution, simply because I think the expectations of the Nizam and those of the
[Guest]: government of India were too wide apart to be able to bridge by mutual concessions of
[Amit Varma]: various kinds.
[Amit Varma]: But yeah, but it strikes me that like you point out, if Nehru is unwilling to actually
[Amit Varma]: invade to use that term or actually unwilling to send his forces in, then even if there
[Amit Varma]: is disagreement, you know, what are the other sort of arrangements that could possibly emerge
[Amit Varma]: out of that?
[Guest]: No, but I think Nehru himself would have sort of eventually agreed to sort of use force
[Guest]: because, because in many other contexts, you know, the reality is that these were discussions
[Guest]: which were made by the cabinet, right?
[Guest]: And again, I'd like to emphasize that, you know, in retrospect, we think of that period
[Guest]: as being sort of dominated by Jawaharlal Nehru.
[Guest]: But the reality was that he was first among equals, which was his envisage position.
[Guest]: You know, they were very stalwart leaders in the Congress Party and members of cabinet
[Guest]: people who are there.
[Guest]: And all of these decisions were taken in cabinet consensus.
[Guest]: I mean, just to give you one example of something which has again become something of interest
[Guest]: in the current context.
[Guest]: You know, at that point of time, the first cabinet of India, Samar Prasad Mukherjee,
[Guest]: who later on founded the Jansangh was a member of the cabinet.
[Guest]: And you know, Mukherjee, of course, later on sort of opposed the fact that, you know,
[Guest]: India's handling over the Kashmir issue was something he wanted the abrogation of 370.
[Amit Varma]: That is one of the sort of facts.
[Amit Varma]: He died in a jail in Srinagar.
[Amit Varma]: Exactly.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: So, so he was sort of he's seen as a martyr to that cause, etc.
[Guest]: Now, but in one of the parliamentary debates, which happened after Mukherjee had turned
[Guest]: against all of this stuff.
[Guest]: Somebody asked him saying, you know, weren't you in the cabinet when the decision was taken
[Guest]: to take this issue to the UN?
[Guest]: Mukherjee said, yes, I was.
[Guest]: And I don't want to get into a discussion about what happened and why we chose that,
[Guest]: which only goes to tell you that, you know, the reality was that these were collective
[Guest]: decisions which were being taken.
[Guest]: Of course, Jawaharlal Nehru as Prime Minister had this thing.
[Guest]: As I said, when it came to the issue of states, Sardar Patel had an important role to play.
[Guest]: Lord Mountbatten still had an important role to play.
[Guest]: As did many other leaders and, you know, Gopalaswamy Iyengar, for instance, on Kashmir had an important
[Guest]: role to play.
[Guest]: So, in the context of Hyderabad, therefore, I think Nehru's hand would have been forced
[Guest]: one way or the other.
[Guest]: But as you're saying, he was very reluctant and primarily so in the context of the violence
[Guest]: of partition, which is something again, I think we need to bear in mind when we think
[Guest]: about the context of some of those decisions to be taken, right?
[Guest]: One of the constant things which, you know, even today Nehru is criticized for, you know,
[Guest]: is to say that why did he take the issue to the UN, right?
[Guest]: As if it was a suo moto decision by Jawaharlal Nehru to take it.
[Guest]: But the reality was that by the third week of December 1947, it had become clear to India
[Guest]: that the only way to evict the raiders who had come into Kashmir and they managed to
[Guest]: hold them, push them back, but to totally sort of stop them was to attack their bases
[Guest]: which were in Punjab, in Pakistani side of Punjab.
[Guest]: And given the nature of communications between India and JNK, the quantum of force that you
[Guest]: needed to use was best possible if you attack from our Punjab into their Punjab, which would
[Guest]: have meant a declaration of war on Pakistan or a crossing of the international border.
[Guest]: And given that Punjab was the theater where maximum amount of violence happened in the
[Guest]: context of partition, you know, the numbers are still disputed, maybe a million people
[Guest]: died, many more millions were displaced.
[Guest]: That seemed like an option which nobody could countenance.
[Guest]: And the reality was that no political leader at that point of time felt that that was such
[Guest]: a great option to exercise.
[Guest]: So then the question became, what is the lesser evil, which is the other alternative that
[Guest]: we can look at?
[Guest]: It is in that context, after a lot of deliberation that they came to a conclusion that going
[Guest]: to the United Nations might be the least of the possible sort of, you know, evils, simply
[Guest]: because any other alternative would be much worse.
[Guest]: And Nehru was also concerned that if India got into a war with Pakistan at this point
[Guest]: of time, it would effectively give a signal for Hindu communal elements in this country
[Guest]: to turn on their Muslim compatriots, right?
[Guest]: Let's remember the context of partition, right?
[Guest]: I mean, there is this whole argument in India that India should become Hindustan, that these
[Guest]: guys have got their Pakistan, so why shouldn't this become Hindustan, right?
[Guest]: And it is that the Jawaharlal Nehru was very, very desirous of preventing.
[Guest]: And let us also remember that those concerns were by no means unfounded.
[Guest]: After the Indian army moved into Hyderabad, there was a massacre of Muslims of Hyderabad
[Guest]: state by Hindus in the same state.
[Guest]: There is a report by Pandit Sundarlal, an independent committee, which went in, that
[Guest]: report was suppressed for many years, which says that perhaps maybe 40,000 people died
[Guest]: in that violence, 40,000.
[Guest]: And you have to just understand that we are talking about an extraordinarily combustible
[Guest]: political situation, communal situation in this country.
[Guest]: That is the context in which these discussions are happening.
[Guest]: So which is why, you know, I begin with that quote with Mukul Kesavan in my book.
[Guest]: Because when we look back, all we see is this standalone decision of going to the UN, which
[Guest]: has become an albatross on India's neck for the subsequent history.
[Guest]: But why did we get there?
[Guest]: Because their concerns were many more.
[Guest]: They did not think that this was going to be the main problem.
[Guest]: Their problem was to ensure that the country just did not explode into another paroxysm
[Amit Varma]: of violence.
[Amit Varma]: And what was happening was, it wasn't just as if there was one Kashmir issued simultaneously,
[Amit Varma]: Junagadh is happening, Hyderabad is happening.
[Amit Varma]: And as you've, you know, described in your book, Nehru was shocked by what happened in
[Amit Varma]: Hyderabad later, because his calculation was that we use force as late as possible only
[Amit Varma]: if pushed into it, because there is a danger of Muslims in the rest of the country being
[Amit Varma]: killed by, you know, Hindu fundamentalists.
[Amit Varma]: And what he didn't envisage, perhaps within Hyderabad, where at that point in time, it
[Amit Varma]: was the Muslims who were attacking Hindus with the Razakars and all that.
[Amit Varma]: That's exactly what would happen in Hyderabad, that Muslims would die in large numbers.
[Amit Varma]: A couple of thoughts strike me here.
[Amit Varma]: One is when you know, when I was reading your book, it struck me that the dilemma that Nehru
[Amit Varma]: faced with regards to hitting the bases of the raiders who came into Kashmir is actually
[Amit Varma]: the exact same one Modi has faced in his five years.
[Amit Varma]: Because all our cross border terrorism, basically the bases are all in Pakistan.
[Amit Varma]: And even Modi has made basically the same decision that Nehru made then, that no, there
[Amit Varma]: is no point starting a war, it's a negative sum game and we will suffer too much, which
[Amit Varma]: is a sensible decision.
[Amit Varma]: And again, perhaps it is the fact that you are Prime Minister and you're in that position
[Amit Varma]: of responsibility that you have to make that decision not to go to war.
[Amit Varma]: But it seems to me that Modi has made exactly the same decision now, as sort of Nehru did
[Amit Varma]: then.
[Amit Varma]: And the other interesting point that I think people often don't realize now, now that we
[Amit Varma]: take the diversity of India for granted, and we take Pakistan for granted being what it
[Amit Varma]: is, is that at that point in time, the two nation theory was very much a life question.
[Amit Varma]: So you know, Nehru had to keep into account that, like, for example, at one point in your
[Amit Varma]: book, you mentioned about how, when, you know, the mechanics of a plebiscite in Kashmir were
[Amit Varma]: being discussed.
[Amit Varma]: And obviously, there were many different versions of it.
[Amit Varma]: But one version that Pakistan said was that as far as the Poonch regions or the Azad Kashmir
[Amit Varma]: regions are concerned, we don't need to do a plebiscite, we'll just go by religious composition,
[Amit Varma]: which immediately Nehru discarded out of hand, because that is a confirmation of the two
[Amit Varma]: nation theory.
[Guest]: Absolutely.
[Guest]: I think what you did not want to do was to take any step which further legitimize this
[Guest]: claim that just because Pakistan has been created on as a homeland for the Muslims of
[Guest]: the subcontinent, so to speak, that was the demand that you know, those principles could
[Guest]: be applied to smaller and smaller pieces of territory, which were under contention.
[Guest]: And I think that was something that and Nehru says that quite openly, which I think is part
[Guest]: of the reason why, you know, there are the Indian political right, especially of the
[Guest]: Hindu right, you know, detest Jawaharlal Nehru with this kind of virulence is because Nehru
[Guest]: and he says it openly, he says that I am not going to allow India to become a Hindu Pakistan,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: This is going to be an India where people of all religions can live and can live safely.
[Guest]: And you know, it was a pledge, which I think he tried to stand true to for the rest of
[Amit Varma]: his life.
[Amit Varma]: And the reason I've sort of, you know, spoken about, you know, this is ostensibly an episode
[Amit Varma]: about Kashmir.
[Amit Varma]: But I've also asked you about Junagadh and Hyderabad and so on, is that one thing I realized
[Amit Varma]: in your book is that a lot of the decisions, a lot of the dynamics around Kashmir between
[Amit Varma]: India and Pakistan and so on, are very much impacted by what was happening in Junagadh
[Amit Varma]: and Hyderabad, because it was simultaneous and even later in Bengal, which we've forgotten
[Amit Varma]: because, you know, the Junagadh problem is solved, there's nothing there, Hyderabad is
[Amit Varma]: solved, they are nicely parts of India.
[Amit Varma]: The fact that there was a plebiscite in Junagadh, the fact that, you know, Nehru and his cabinet
[Amit Varma]: were fighting a battle on all these different fronts, and it was by no means something they
[Amit Varma]: could take for granted that the India that we know on the map today will actually be
[Amit Varma]: what it is.
[Amit Varma]: You know, everything was up for grabs, it could all have fallen apart in a moment.
[Amit Varma]: How did those particular battles of Junagadh and Hyderabad affect India's thinking on Kashmir?
[Guest]: Well, I think they affected it in the sense that they committed India to a certain position
[Guest]: about the right to self determination of peoples of these places, rather than assuming that
[Guest]: simple religious composition should sort of settle the issue once and for all, right.
[Guest]: So in that sense, I think there was a thing.
[Guest]: As I said, in the context of Junagadh, India held a referendum after the Indian Army went
[Guest]: in.
[Guest]: In the context of Hyderabad, it did not.
[Guest]: And in the context of Kashmir, it affirmed at the time of the accession that a referendum
[Guest]: will be held when conditions are suitable conditions are established.
[Guest]: And the Indian position subsequently was that suitable conditions have not been established
[Guest]: because of the continued Pakistani occupation, military occupation of a portion of the state
[Guest]: of Jammu and Kashmir.
[Guest]: Now, I think it's also fair to point out that as the Kashmir issue sort of developed from
[Guest]: 48 onwards, the Indian government's own thinking on the advisability of a plebiscite changed,
[Guest]: right.
[Guest]: And they changed for a couple of reasons.
[Guest]: The first, as I said, was that there was an official position that there were the conditions
[Guest]: for holding a free and fair plebiscite would not be obtained so long as the Pakistan Army
[Guest]: was in occupation of certain parts of the thing.
[Guest]: The second reason was that the Indians themselves were unsure whether Sheikh Abdullah, the person
[Guest]: who had sort of, you know, committed on behalf of the Kashmiri Muslims that yes, we support
[Guest]: the accession to India would actually be able to prevail upon his own people to ratify the
[Guest]: decision in a subsequent plebiscite.
[Guest]: Because let's face it, there's another incident which happened, which again, we tend to forget,
[Guest]: which is that around the time of partition, and in 1947, there was an extraordinary sort
[Guest]: of communal violence which took place in the Jammu province of the J&K state.
[Guest]: And there, Jammu was actually in 1947, again, sounds ironic today, a Muslim majority province
[Guest]: in terms of population.
[Guest]: And there was huge ethnic cleansing of Muslims.
[Guest]: And many of them left for Pakistan and the Punjab.
[Guest]: And that violence and what happened in Jammu also had an impact on the Muslims of the valley,
[Guest]: because they were unsure what is going to happen to them, would they be reduced to a
[Guest]: minority status and so on, right?
[Guest]: So all these fears in the minds of people about whether joining India was actually the
[Guest]: wise decision.
[Guest]: And all your bets hinged on Sheikh Abdullah being able to prevail upon the Kashmiri people
[Guest]: that joining a secular India is actually the best thing for the state of Jammu and Kashmir.
[Guest]: And the third thing is that already by the summer of 1948, even before the ceasefire is
[Guest]: announced in Kashmir, both Jawaharlal Nehru and Sardar Patel come to a conclusion that
[Guest]: maybe the best solution for this is simply to partition the state along the existing
[Guest]: sort of line where the two armies are fighting each other, which is broadly, you may call
[Guest]: it the ceasefire line, later line of control, etc, right?
[Guest]: So and this is something which is true of even Sardar Patel.
[Guest]: Sardar Patel tells the British sort of High Commissioner to India in June 1948, that the
[Guest]: best solution to this problem is just to settle it on the status quo.
[Guest]: That I think was something that actually the Indians were prepared for, the Pakistanis
[Guest]: were never acceptable to that.
[Guest]: Liaquat Ali Khan shot it down entirely.
[Guest]: He said, nothing, Kashmir banega Pakistan, remained their slogan, and that was put on
[Guest]: the storage, right?
[Guest]: So which is why when today, people keep insisting that if Patel had a free hand, you know, the
[Guest]: entire state would have been reconquered, it is just fantasy.
[Guest]: It does not even accord with the facts of the situation, which were that at that point
[Guest]: of time, both Nehru and Patel were actually aligned on the idea that we should go for
[Guest]: a partition of the state, Nehru even proposed it informally to Liaquat Ali Khan only to
[Amit Varma]: be shot down.
[Amit Varma]: And just to sort of go back into the historical events, and a little before that, obviously,
[Amit Varma]: when, you know, both the nations became independent at that time, you know, Jinnah famously believed
[Amit Varma]: that, quote, Kashmir will fall into a lap, like a ripe fruit, stop code.
[Amit Varma]: And that makes sense, because there was geographic contiguity, the religious composition, the
[Amit Varma]: fact that it was Muslim majority, all of it.
[Amit Varma]: And at that point, there was no contiguity with India, either, Gurdaspur was kind of
[Amit Varma]: given later.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore, that contiguity was there.
[Amit Varma]: And there is this interesting contrast there, where with Junagadh and Hyderabad, you have
[Amit Varma]: Hindu majority people, but you have Muslim rulers.
[Amit Varma]: And India is taking the position there that was the will of the people has to matter.
[Amit Varma]: But in Kashmir, you have a Hindu ruler, and you have a Muslim majority state, had they
[Amit Varma]: allowed the Hindu ruler to accede to India, number one, and number two, after so and then,
[Amit Varma]: obviously, Pakistan, which doesn't really its army is not in a terribly good state,
[Amit Varma]: as you point out, but they send these tribals and they take over what is Azad Kashmir, Poonch
[Amit Varma]: and Gilgit and all of that, and they hold that bit.
[Amit Varma]: And at that point, whenever the UN or anybody else proposes that both the armies have to
[Amit Varma]: withdraw, both the forces have to withdraw, Nehru claims that there is absolutely no equivalence,
[Amit Varma]: because hey, you know, it belongs to us, Hari Singh has acceded.
[Amit Varma]: So how does one then explain this sort of conflict of principles that were, you know,
[Amit Varma]: in Junagadh and Hyderabad, you're saying Hindu majority people, they have to decide.
[Amit Varma]: But here you're saying, no, it doesn't matter what the majority is, the prince has acceded
[Amit Varma]: to us.
[Guest]: And that's what matters.
[Guest]: You know, actually speaking, that was not the position, because when the tribal invasion
[Guest]: first began, the Maharaja of Jammu and Kashmir, Hari Singh, very quickly proposed to India
[Guest]: that, you know, the state should accede to India, because you know, he said that can
[Guest]: India actually sort of offer us protection.
[Guest]: And the discussion in the first cabinet meeting, when that happened, was that we should secure
[Guest]: accession before we do that.
[Guest]: Because then we are within our rights to send troops to any part of territory which belongs
[Guest]: to India.
[Guest]: And in that meeting, it is Jawaharlal Nehru who actually says that the question of accession
[Guest]: is actually immaterial in this context, we are all talking legalities, what matters is
[Guest]: whether we can be sure that the people of Kashmir will be with us, that they want this.
[Guest]: And that in order to secure that, we have to get Sheikh Abdullah to sort of actually
[Guest]: give his imprimatur to this instrument of accession.
[Guest]: So unless and until Sheikh Abdullah is brought in to the government of Kashmir by the Maharaja,
[Guest]: and he sort of agrees that this is the way to go forward, frankly, we are going to be
[Guest]: building a castle of sand, because it is going to be washed away by the tide.
[Guest]: Because if we can't rely on the support of the people, there is no way that we can hold
[Amit Varma]: on to a Muslim majority province.
[Amit Varma]: And how is Sheikh Abdullah in charge of the government there?
[Guest]: No, he was not.
[Guest]: He was in prison at that point of time.
[Guest]: So they brought him out and they put him in charge.
[Guest]: So you know, he was someone who was at loggerheads with the Maharaja.
[Guest]: So it is at Jawaharlal Nehru and the Indian Nationalists insistence that Abdullah is then
[Guest]: sort of brought in to this, you know, government which is constituted by the Maharaja.
[Guest]: And you know, it is in that context that Indians finally agree to accept the instrument of
[Guest]: accession and send the troops in.
[Guest]: So I think the initial instincts were absolutely correct, which is that you needed this to
[Guest]: happen.
[Guest]: The problem was twofold.
[Guest]: As I said, one was that once the Pakistanis came to control a certain part of that territory,
[Guest]: then the question became whether we should have a plebiscite even while Pakistan is controlling
[Guest]: any of those things, and whether we can actually sort of expect anybody to, you know, impartially
[Guest]: sort of overlook or see such a plebiscite.
[Guest]: And the UN debates in 1948 convinced India that the great powers were playing politics
[Guest]: there.
[Guest]: They were taking very partisan positions.
[Guest]: And ergo, you could not really expect a impartial plebiscite to happen.
[Guest]: And this issue would simply be decided that, oh, these are Muslims, they should go to Pakistan.
[Guest]: Right?
[Guest]: This is the principle that, you know, things would be legitimized.
[Guest]: So which is why the option of a plebiscite is something that the Indians start backing
[Unknown]: off from.
[Guest]: Even Jawaharlal Nehru starts backing off from it.
[Guest]: I think we should face up to the facts.
[Guest]: Whatever the official position, which is that Pakistani military presence prevents this.
[Guest]: The reality is that the Indians themselves are not sure of the wisdom of going ahead
[Guest]: with a plebiscite in the context of those things happening.
[Guest]: Right?
[Guest]: And Sheikh Abdullah initially feels quite happy that yes, we know we should sort of,
[Guest]: you know, a plebiscite will go in India's favor.
[Guest]: But over a period of time, even he starts having doubts as this issue sort of continues
[Guest]: to simmer.
[Guest]: So there is a genuine concern about whether a plebiscite is going to work in your favor
[Guest]: or not.
[Guest]: Now, when you have that situation, it is in that context that the Indians then start thinking
[Guest]: about what are the alternatives to a plebiscite, which will still allow for a degree of self-determination
[Guest]: to happen.
[Guest]: Because what they have pledged is that the Kashmiris will take a stand on their own.
[Guest]: And it is in that context that actually they invite Sheikh Abdullah to come and join the
[Guest]: Indian Constituent Assembly and say that we will give you enough provisions for autonomy
[Guest]: and give you in a position where your state's constitution, decided by your Constituent
[Guest]: Assembly, which is a JNK Constituent Assembly, will decide how much of India's constitution
[Guest]: you will accept.
[Guest]: So that was seen as another instrument of self-determination for the Kashmiris, which
[Guest]: is why the Article 370, which came out of those negotiations and was subsequently adopted
[Guest]: in the Indian Constitution, was actually brought in.
[Guest]: So the Indians toyed with many versions of what could constitute self-determination once
[Guest]: the plebiscite was seen as an option, which was either impractical or definitely likely
[Guest]: to go adverse under circumstances which were not acceptable to India.
[Amit Varma]: And what's also interesting is that at one point in time during these negotiations, Nehru
[Amit Varma]: was at that moment for the plebiscite and Jinnah wasn't.
[Amit Varma]: Jinnah was worried that after all that the raiders had done, that those places where
[Amit Varma]: they carried out all the violence and the looting and the rapes and everything, would
[Amit Varma]: definitely not vote for joining Pakistan.
[Amit Varma]: You know, we'll come to 370 after the break.
[Amit Varma]: But what also kind of strikes me as interesting here is how the incentives of the various
[Amit Varma]: parties are evolving, like Sheikh Abdullah gradually moves towards wanting independence.
[Amit Varma]: The British pretty much side with Pakistan for much of this process.
[Amit Varma]: How's that working out?
[Guest]: Like, what's the deal with the British?
[Guest]: Okay.
[Guest]: So if you want to just sort of look at what the bottom line incentives of each side, and
[Guest]: I'm conscious when I'm saying this, that I'm stripping things off certain historical nuance,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: But just to sort of get our listeners to have a sense of what were the, you know, bottom
[Guest]: line sort of stakes for which people were playing.
[Guest]: I think it is fair to say, as far as India was concerned, that once the state of JNK
[Guest]: acceded, and Sheikh Abdullah sort of came on board, and as you say, they managed to
[Guest]: successfully sort of at least repulse the raiders from the valley of Kashmir, even if
[Guest]: they remained in other parts and so on.
[Guest]: The most important consideration became holding on to Kashmir, not just because it was a piece
[Guest]: of territory, which had strategic importance, which it had, but because and this is something
[Guest]: that comes up repeatedly in Indian cabinet discussions and Nehru's own sort of this thing,
[Guest]: that Kashmir in effect becomes a symbol of the kind of India that they want to build.
[Guest]: That we don't believe in the two nation theory.
[Guest]: This is a direct negation of two nation theory that a Muslim majority province should have
[Guest]: its own volition have accepted to come even when it was being caused by Pakistan through
[Guest]: the sending of raiders, right.
[Guest]: So that becomes a symbolically a very important thing.
[Guest]: You know, in retrospect, people say that Jawaharlal Nehru was emotional about Kashmir.
[Guest]: I think he was, but I think the emotion was not the main governing thing in his thinking.
[Guest]: What was the main governing thing was the idea that, you know, Kashmiris by their decision
[Guest]: had affirmed what he and his colleagues believed should be the Indian nationalist project going
[Guest]: forward, that independent India is not going to be an India, which is going to be a Hindustan.
[Guest]: It is going to be an India, which would have enough space for all minorities for all diversity
[Guest]: to be accommodated and Kashmir tends to become a totem of India's commitment to secularism
[Amit Varma]: and pluralism.
[Amit Varma]: Except a slight complication here and we'll come to that perhaps towards the end of the
[Amit Varma]: episode is that the Kashmiri will was never really known.
[Amit Varma]: First it was Hari Singh exceeding and then it was Sheikh Abdullah on his side, but even
[Amit Varma]: he was not really an elected leader per se.
[Amit Varma]: So the will of the people, which is, you know, central to the whole thing was never actually
[Amit Varma]: a certain, but we'll come to that later.
[Guest]: I mean, absolutely.
[Guest]: And I think we should come to it because I think it's an important question because it
[Guest]: has an important bearing for how the Kashmiris saw all of these.
[Guest]: So let me just sort of finish up what I think were the incentives, right?
[Guest]: As far as Pakistan was concerned, I think for Jinnah, what he wanted very simply and
[Guest]: what he was playing for was to say that, listen, why don't we exchange the accession of Kashmir
[Guest]: and Hyderabad or some such thing, right?
[Guest]: So basically saying that, listen, I let go of the others if you let go of Kashmir, because
[Guest]: he did not, Jinnah had no commitment to the idea of self-determination in any straightforward
[Amit Varma]: sense.
[Amit Varma]: And at some point, those bargaining chips disappear when we get Hyderabad.
[Guest]: Yeah, when you get Hyderabad and all of Junagadh is taken away.
[Guest]: So, but that is the game that Jinnah was trying to play was to say that, listen, can we sort
[Guest]: of come to some kind of thing and he resisted some proposals, which I think even Pakistanis
[Guest]: today would accept that in retrospect were the wrong choices to make.
[Guest]: Had he accepted that, you know, at that point of time, he would have done a plebiscite,
[Guest]: you know, maybe things would have gone in their favor, who knows, right, it was always
[Guest]: an open ended situation.
[Amit Varma]: Like at one point, he rejected a plebiscite in Kashmir, you point out, because the Raiders
[Amit Varma]: seem to be winning at that point, he thought we're going to win anyway.
[Guest]: So, you know, why, why take a chance, right?
[Guest]: So in a sense, that was his, that was the game that they were playing for.
[Guest]: And they have
[Guest]: They miscalculated.
[Guest]: They miscalculated, but they have continued to play that game for, you know, ever since,
[Guest]: so to speak.
[Guest]: As far as the Kashmiris themselves are concerned, right?
[Guest]: I think, again, we have to sort of break them down into saying who are the Kashmiris, right?
[Guest]: So on the one hand, there was the Maharaja, who was also initially undecided between India
[Guest]: and Pakistan, and in fact, would have liked to have some kind of an independent status
[Guest]: with treaties with both countries, possibly.
[Guest]: But then the Raiders came and
[Guest]: They sort of forced his hand.
[Guest]: He was indecisive.
[Guest]: He did not know what to do.
[Guest]: It was a difficult situation.
[Guest]: Violence in adjoining province of Punjab was rattling his own population, both the Hindus
[Guest]: of Jammu, as well as the Muslims of Jammu and of the Kashmir Valley, right?
[Guest]: So there was all of this problem.
[Guest]: Pakistan is a very far-flung, very big state, the original state of Jammu and Kashmir, you
[Guest]: know, is a very sort of big entity.
[Guest]: So there was his problem.
[Guest]: Within Jammu itself, there were different views.
[Guest]: The Muslims of Jammu were part of the original Muslim conference, out of which Sheikh Abdullah
[Guest]: had broken away and formed his national conference.
[Guest]: And many of them felt that we should actually go for accession to Pakistan.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, till a few minutes ago, I didn't know that Jammu used to be Muslim majority.
[Guest]: In fact, there's a good book by Christopher Sneddon, a scholar who has looked quite closely
[Guest]: into the sort of the violence in Jammu province in 1947.
[Guest]: And what how that sort of shaped the sort of the thing, right?
[Guest]: And the the people of Kashmir themselves, right, of whether of the Kashmir Valley or
[Guest]: of this thing, as you say, none of them had an opportunity really to sort of have their
[Guest]: say in any of these things.
[Guest]: But again, you know, I would say that that is broadly true of many other things.
[Guest]: You know, the Indian Constituent Assembly was elected on a very limited franchise, but
[Guest]: then went on to shape a constitution for the rest of the country.
[Guest]: It was never put to a referendum.
[Guest]: You know, the American Constitution was put to a referendum, for instance, right?
[Guest]: Indian Constitution never been put to a referendum.
[Guest]: So what constitutes self determination?
[Guest]: How are the people to speak for themselves?
[Guest]: So you know, is something that I think always remains an open question, right?
[Guest]: Any such arrangement is bound to have its limitations.
[Guest]: And you are absolutely right that, you know, we never knew and can perhaps never know what
[Guest]: exactly people at that point of time felt about accession to India or to Pakistan, or,
[Amit Varma]: you know, joining some other state.
[Amit Varma]: And I guess the moral force of that question really changes from time to time, depending
[Amit Varma]: on how the state is behaving and how the people feel about it.
[Amit Varma]: Separate question, we'll come back to that to just continue with the talk of incentives,
[Amit Varma]: for example, what made Abdullah sort of veer towards, you know, wanting independence in
[Guest]: the early 50s?
[Guest]: So there were two things.
[Guest]: First of all, you know, again, it is not absolutely clear that independence was Abdullah's favorite
[Guest]: option, because I think his own position was a little more nuanced than independence, which
[Guest]: is the way it has been presented, both contemporaneously, it was presented like that.
[Guest]: And that's the way, you know, we tend to think about it.
[Guest]: So at the beginning, you know, and when the Raiders came into the state of Kashmir and
[Guest]: accession of Kashmir to India happened, Sheikh Abdullah was willing to sort of, you know,
[Guest]: go along with that move and support it, because he knew that India's support was needed to
[Guest]: ensure the freedom of the Kashmiris to make any choices for themselves, and not to be
[Guest]: simply annexed by Pakistan in a coercive move.
[Guest]: Sheikh Abdullah was for his time, a quite a progressive political thinker.
[Guest]: He had a idea for the development of Kashmir in political economic terms, something which
[Guest]: he called the Naya Kashmir Manifesto.
[Guest]: And the Naya Kashmir agenda was something that Sheikh Abdullah envisaged among many
[Guest]: other things, very far reaching land reforms, right, because Kashmir was a highly feudal
[Guest]: state, you know, the ruler and his family and their extended plan held very extraordinary
[Guest]: amounts of land holdings across the state.
[Guest]: So all of that land redistribution had to happen, land to the tiller, which was the
[Guest]: main slogan of Abdullah's sort of, you know, foot sort of followers, you know, the Kashmiri
[Guest]: Muslims in the valley was a very important thing.
[Guest]: He knew very well that Pakistan was unlikely to be a state where these kinds of policies
[Guest]: would flourish.
[Guest]: And I think he has been proven right by history, because the state of Pakistan could not deal
[Guest]: with the problems of large landholders who are very influential in Pakistani politics
[Guest]: of the time, right, the Punjabi sort of landlords, right, you know, they still have these enormous
[Amit Varma]: estates and such.
[Guest]: And the dominance continues.
[Guest]: Dominance continues.
[Guest]: So the landed sort of aristocracy's lock hold on that state was something Abdullah felt
[Guest]: would prevent it.
[Guest]: Secondly, Abdullah knew that if Kashmir had to be kept together as a state, which he wanted
[Guest]: to, he did not just want to have the Kashmir Valley, but he believed that Jammu and Kashmir
[Guest]: had a certain kind of historical effective unity, which had to be kept in mind.
[Guest]: And that that state was a very diverse one, because they were Hindus, they were Hindus
[Guest]: of different kinds, they were Muslims of different things, the Muslims of the Valley are different
[Guest]: from Muslims of Jammu, they are different in Ladakh, in the northern areas, which is
[Guest]: now with Pakistan, Mirpur had its own sort of history of troubles with Srinagar.
[Guest]: So to hold all of these together, you needed something other than religion.
[Guest]: So in that sense, Sheikh Abdullah believed that a form of Kashmiriyat, which was a certain
[Guest]: variant of sort of non-communal Kashmiri nationalism was the best group.
[Guest]: And like all nationalisms, it was an invented tradition, right, I mean, there's very good
[Guest]: books by historians like Chitralekha Zutsi, which tell us how the notion of Kashmiriyat
[Guest]: was constructed for a certain political project, right.
[Guest]: And that is a very important part of what he was trying to do.
[Guest]: And he believed that that project had much closer affinities with the project of Indian
[Guest]: nationalism, which Jawaharlal Nehru, Gandhi and Patel and others were espousing, rather
[Unknown]: than Pakistan.
[Guest]: So his incentives initially were therefore to sort of join this thing.
[Guest]: But he knew that as a democratic leader, he could only sort of, he could work with India
[Guest]: only if he would carry the people along with him.
[Guest]: And once it became clear that a plebiscite was unlikely to be held, that the Indian leadership
[Guest]: themselves were, you know, rethinking the wisdom of a plebiscite, telling him privately
[Guest]: that listen, why don't we do other things, look at Constituent Assembly, other forms
[Guest]: of democratic, you know, ways of ascertaining power and so on, popular will and so on, Sheikh
[Guest]: Abdullah himself started having concerns.
[Guest]: The second thing was that I think when everyone went to the UN, whether it was in January
[Guest]: 1948, they assumed that there's going to be a quick resolution of the problem.
[Guest]: Yeah, you know, everyone thought one way or the other, some solution will be sort of suggested
[Amit Varma]: and the problem will be settled.
[Amit Varma]: And also whatever talk of a plebiscite came up, one of the conditions was that the administration
[Amit Varma]: has to change.
[Amit Varma]: And even if he remains at the head of it, the composition has to change completely.
[Amit Varma]: And he probably, I'm guessing at that point felt threatened by that.
[Guest]: And Abdullah himself did not want a plebiscite, right?
[Guest]: Exactly.
[Guest]: So all I'm trying to say is that it is not just the government of India, which was resigning
[Guest]: from a plebiscite.
[Guest]: Abdullah himself came to doubt whether a plebiscite will A, work in his favor, even temporarily,
[Guest]: which is to say that he might have to step out of power to allow some kind of administration.
[Guest]: And as I said, they had doubts about whether a UN supervised administration actually going
[Guest]: to be fair, because they may just treat this as a Hindu Muslim problem and say that Muslims
[Guest]: have to go to Pakistan.
[Guest]: And then there was this thing.
[Guest]: So Abdullah's thinking, the way it was evolving, was that the Kashmir problem can only be solved
[Guest]: if there is some agreement between India and Pakistan.
[Guest]: And the way that Abdullah would try and think of it, and the way that he articulated it
[Guest]: almost till 1964, till Jawaharlal Nehru's death, was that Kashmir has to become a bridge
[Guest]: between India and Pakistan, right?
[Guest]: Both countries in some ways have an interest in guaranteeing the independence of Kashmir.
[Guest]: So when you talk about independence, it's not necessarily clear that he wanted a totally
[Guest]: independent state.
[Guest]: But I think what he would have liked was some kind of an arrangement where both India and
[Guest]: Pakistan would guarantee the security and other things of Kashmir, and would accept
[Guest]: that this was not an arena where their competitions spill over to, and so on, right?
[Guest]: So I think these were all ideas up there, because it was such a unclear situation.
[Guest]: See, you know, the reality is that, you know, at any given point of time, future is highly
[Guest]: open ended.
[Guest]: You just don't know what is coming out of something, you know, when the Indians were
[Guest]: discussing the cabinet mission plan, it is quite unlikely that they could have envisaged
[Guest]: that actually rejecting this option meant a total partition of the country.
[Guest]: But that is what it even ended up in, right?
[Guest]: So future is open ended.
[Guest]: And Abdullah was thinking through how best to solve this problem, when a plebiscite was
[Guest]: not acceptable to India, when it was not acceptable to him as likely to be, he did not want a
[Guest]: straightforward partition of the state on religious lines.
[Guest]: So what is the way out?
[Guest]: At the same time, his own people have their wishes, you know, he cannot sort of disregard
[Guest]: what the people might want.
[Guest]: So he had to triangulate many different things.
[Guest]: And it was in that context that he was looking at various kinds of things.
[Guest]: And of course, then the government of India took a view that Nawar Lal Nehru personally,
[Guest]: that Abdullah was sort of moving towards independence.
[Guest]: And that the best way to sort of then solve the problem is to lock him up, remove him
[Guest]: as Chief Minister of State, imprison him arbitrarily.
[Guest]: And then, you know, try and push through other kinds of solutions, all of which turned out
[Guest]: to be options, which were only either worse or much worse than each other.
[Amit Varma]: And at this point, the British incentives also are because of the way things are sort
[Amit Varma]: of heading towards Pakistan, like you talk about, you know, how their delegation was
[Amit Varma]: led by this chap called Philip Noel Baker.
[Amit Varma]: And quoting from your book, again, quote, Noel Baker believed that Britain's position
[Amit Varma]: in the Middle East was doddering.
[Amit Varma]: In scurrying from Palestine, they had already alienated the Arabs.
[Amit Varma]: The latter might be further inflamed if Britain wobbled on Kashmir.
[Amit Varma]: And now you're quoting him, it was important to avoid the danger of antagonizing the whole
[Amit Varma]: of Islam by appearing to side with India against Pakistan, stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: So which is why even though they are sort of acting as impartial mediators or whatever,
[Guest]: they're playing a role, which, yeah, and in some ways, it's not so surprising, right?
[Guest]: See, the British, it's rational for them to not just rational, the British never conceded
[Guest]: the Indian National Congress's claim that they spoke for all communities in India.
[Guest]: They created the Pakistan demand out of Muslim League during the Second World War.
[Guest]: And again, something we discussed at length, when we talked about that period, right?
[Guest]: It was a, it was a demand, which they encouraged Jinnah to come out with, because they wanted
[Guest]: to undermine the Congress's claim that it spoke for the entire nation.
[Guest]: Now, obviously, that was a grandiose, arrogant claim in its own right.
[Guest]: But there was a core of truth to it, which was that Indian nationalism under Gandhi and
[Guest]: other leaders of the Congress was not committed to a project of majoritarianism, but of pluralism.
[Guest]: And that was something the British never accepted.
[Guest]: And what Philip Noyle Baker is doing in the UN, effectively is a continuation of the same
[Guest]: principle of saying this is a Muslim majority area.
[Guest]: Why should it be with India, right?
[Guest]: What right does India have to sort of insist that there should even be a plebiscite there?
[Guest]: It should have automatically gone to Pakistan, right?
[Guest]: So the presumption is that, that is the way these things should have worked.
[Guest]: And that if for whatever reason, the Kashmiris, because they were under attack from tribals,
[Guest]: etc, of Pakistan felt that, you know, they'd actually be better off not being with Pakistan,
[Guest]: that was the wrong decision, right?
[Guest]: So in a sense, this is an old model of the imperial understanding of the peoples of the
[Guest]: Indian subcontinent.
[Guest]: And of course, the Middle East, as I say, you know, the context there was that they
[Guest]: had sort of also gotten out of Palestine.
[Guest]: So they just felt that, you know, their standing in the Muslim world, so to speak, was going
[Guest]: down.
[Guest]: Now, all of these were very much in keeping with their attitude towards India, the problem
[Guest]: of India and the problems of Indian nationalism, right?
[Guest]: And their refusal to accept that Indian nationalism could actually be something which would be
[Guest]: beyond the interests of this or that community.
[Guest]: They never wanted to concede that.
[Amit Varma]: And an interesting dynamic in this period, which again, I wasn't aware of till I read
[Amit Varma]: your book, is that in both the armies, because there weren't Indians and Pakistanis senior
[Amit Varma]: enough, basically, both the India and Pakistan armies were headed by British officers, who
[Amit Varma]: were therefore had been essentially colleagues with their counterparts.
[Amit Varma]: And there was a rule and function that if there is a war between the two sides, all
[Amit Varma]: the British officers will step away from the battle.
[Amit Varma]: There was a stand down order, so there was a stand down order.
[Amit Varma]: So how did that sort of bizarre dynamic shape the...
[Guest]: It was a bizarre dynamic, because, you know, and again, there's something the background
[Guest]: to it, we discussed when we...
[Amit Varma]: And what it also means is none of the armies are very keen to do battle at all, in a sense.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: So the, the British commanders in chief of both the Indian and the Pakistani armies certainly
[Guest]: had a back channel kind of a dialogue, they were in touch with their high commissioners,
[Guest]: the British high commissioners in both countries, to try and say that, listen, we will try and
[Guest]: make sure that there is no war, we want to sort of prevent both sides from doing all
[Guest]: of that stuff.
[Guest]: Now, but the reality is that I think it would be a bit of an exaggeration to suggest that
[Guest]: their views, at least as far as India was concerned, were decisive.
[Guest]: I don't think that's the case.
[Guest]: I don't think it is the case, as some historians have made it out.
[Guest]: And I think there's a plausible argument there.
[Guest]: But I don't think it really stacks up in the light of everything that we know.
[Guest]: That it was the commander in chief who scuttled in effect an Indian offensive in Kashmir and
[Guest]: so on.
[Guest]: I don't think that was the case.
[Guest]: There were genuine constraints.
[Guest]: Beyond that, there was these political considerations about what going to a war with Pakistan will
[Guest]: entail.
[Guest]: And then I think in some ways, their political preferences aligned with that of the Prime
[Guest]: Minister who himself was keen to sort of avoid escalation in the context of the violence
[Guest]: of partition and so on.
[Guest]: So I think, yes, it was a bizarre situation.
[Guest]: The Indians recognized it to be a bizarre situation.
[Guest]: But there were many arbitrary things about that situation.
[Guest]: I mean, think of it this way, Lord Mountbatten remains the Governor General of India after
[Guest]: independence because India, you know, is sort of has dominion status during that period.
[Guest]: But not only is he Governor General, and you would imagine that is some kind of very constitutional
[Guest]: figurehead.
[Guest]: But Mountbatten then becomes chairman of the Defense Committee of the cabinet, even though
[Guest]: he's not a member of the cabinet, right?
[Guest]: And there he is quite influential in shaping the way that people think about these kinds
[Guest]: of questions.
[Guest]: So there were many anomalies to that period.
[Guest]: And it was a very transitionally period, you know, it's a period where so many things were
[Guest]: in flux.
[Guest]: And in some ways, the Pakistanis were much more dependent on British officers than India
[Guest]: was.
[Guest]: In fact, Pakistan continued to remain highly dependent on British officers in even in their
[Guest]: army for much later than India.
[Guest]: And even India, it's worth recalling that did not have a first Indian naval chief of
[Guest]: staff till the mid 1950s.
[Amit Varma]: So before moving on quick counterfactual, like one interesting part of your book, which
[Amit Varma]: we'll again get to is the sort of the Bengal crisis of 1950-51, which also shaped the way
[Amit Varma]: Nehru approached the Kashmir issue, which was left after that.
[Amit Varma]: And one tidbit there, which you point out is that Nehru constantly thought of resigning,
[Amit Varma]: because he was he was fed up.
[Amit Varma]: At one point, he had even prepared a resignation for the cabinet, which he didn't give through.
[Amit Varma]: And he just wanted to move on in the case of the Bengal, it was because he wanted to
[Amit Varma]: go in his personal capacity, the way sort of Gandhi would have done and sort of visit
[Amit Varma]: the areas and try to bring about peace because he was personally affected by that.
[Amit Varma]: But he thought of resignation.
[Amit Varma]: And even apart from that, there is a counterfactual question of which which critics of Nehru would
[Amit Varma]: ask today, that what if Nehru hadn't been the Prime Minister, which I ask you now in
[Amit Varma]: this context, but even otherwise, it's a fascinating question.
[Amit Varma]: Because if one looks at sort of Indian political history during that period, what really appears
[Amit Varma]: to be the case is that Nehru is a man alone and a man apart.
[Amit Varma]: And he just happens to be Prime Minister and a lot of India's direction is shaped by that.
[Amit Varma]: But otherwise, there is a very strong strand of Hindu nationalist leaders within the Congress,
[Amit Varma]: you know, like Patel and Panth and Rajendra Prasad and so on.
[Amit Varma]: And that's a very strong stream of leaders.
[Amit Varma]: And it's just kind of happenstance that it is this one man who thinks in this particular
[Amit Varma]: way, who happens to be in charge.
[Amit Varma]: So in the limited context of all our battles to form the Indian Union, you know, with Kashmir,
[Amit Varma]: which is the subject of today, but even Junagadh, Hyderabad and whatever else was happening,
[Amit Varma]: how would things have been different, you think, if say Patel was PM and Nehru was not
[Guest]: on the scene, he was a private citizen?
[Guest]: Well, you know, it's a very large counterfactual question to ask.
[Guest]: And it's not a cop out.
[Guest]: But I just want to say that, you know, counterfactual questions operate best when they are in very
[Guest]: narrow domains, right, when you can control for a number of things.
[Guest]: And this is the kind of counterfactual question, I think, which leads us more into speculation
[Guest]: than to a historically informed answer.
[Guest]: But I would, in the first instance, suggest that some of the premises of your question
[Guest]: are themselves questionable.
[Guest]: It is true to say that, yes, there were elements within the Congress Party, which believed
[Guest]: that in the wake of partition, you know, Muslims of India had to prove their loyalty.
[Guest]: Even Sardar Patel believed that.
[Guest]: But I think it is also in all fairness and historical justice to be pointed out that
[Guest]: people like Rajendra Prasad, Sardar Patel, were Gandhians to the core.
[Guest]: They were people who led the Gandhian campaigns, right?
[Guest]: When we think about Gandhian nationalism, they were the foot soldiers of that nationalism.
[Guest]: And I think it would be wrong to assimilate them to the Hindu nationalist ideology, which
[Guest]: the Hindu Mahasabha espoused with all clarity, even back in the day.
[Guest]: Just because there were certain degrees of overlap, which occurred as a part of consequence
[Guest]: of the, you know, the partition itself.
[Guest]: Like, for instance, in Ramchandra Guha's book, India after Gandhi, he, you know, presents
[Guest]: a circular which is circulated by the Ministry of Home Affairs, saying, advising all Department
[Guest]: of Government of India to keep a look at the sort of their Muslim officers and so on to
[Guest]: ensure that they were being loyal to the state, right?
[Guest]: Now, again, I don't think this was an ideological move on the part of the Ministry of State,
[Guest]: which was led by Sardar Patel, but a reflexive reaction to what was happening in the context
[Guest]: of the sort of thing, right?
[Guest]: And let's also remember that Patel was the one who took it upon himself after the assassination
[Guest]: of Gandhi to ban the RSS and really cracked down on them.
[Guest]: So I don't think he's as easily assimilable to that.
[Guest]: But yes, there were people of varying degrees of Hindu conservatism, Hindu nationalism in
[Guest]: the Congress.
[Guest]: And in fact, Nehru has a showdown with people like Pashutam Das Tandon after Patel's death
[Amit Varma]: as well.
[Amit Varma]: Right.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, just to sort of give you a couple of illustrations of what I mean, and my knowledge
[Amit Varma]: is obviously far more limited than yours, but I'm just kind of thinking aloud because
[Amit Varma]: I've done episodes on these recently and read these specific books recently.
[Amit Varma]: And there is an interesting book called Ayodhya, the Dark Knight by Dhrendra Jha and another.
[Amit Varma]: That's about the installation of the idol.
[Amit Varma]: That's the installation of the idol.
[Amit Varma]: And what is interesting there is again, in that narrative, Nehru is a man apart in the
[Amit Varma]: sense that the idol of Ram is installed in the Babri Masjid complex.
[Amit Varma]: And Nehru immediately says that something must be done, get the idol out, sort the issue
[Amit Varma]: out.
[Amit Varma]: And Congressman Govind Ballabh Pant, who is CM of UP, Lal Bahadur Shastri, who is Home
[Amit Varma]: Minister of UP are all basically complicit.
[Amit Varma]: And they don't follow Nehru's instructions.
[Amit Varma]: The idols remain there.
[Amit Varma]: And then eventually it becomes a fait accompli, they are just there and it's too late to do
[Amit Varma]: anything about them.
[Amit Varma]: And the other book I read recently was about the Gita Press by Akshay Mukul, with whom
[Amit Varma]: I've recorded an episode, but it'll come out after this in a few weeks time because I have
[Amit Varma]: a bit of a backlog.
[Amit Varma]: But and there again, what I find in the narrative is that and the Gita Press, of course, is
[Amit Varma]: this publishing house, which has this monthly magazine called Kalyan and they're carrying
[Amit Varma]: out this massive cultural campaign to build Hindutva nationalism and Hindi nationalism.
[Amit Varma]: And there again, you find that a lot of prominent congressmen right from the 20s onwards, whether
[Amit Varma]: it's, you know, the generation of Madan Mohan Malviya, or even at this point, people like
[Amit Varma]: Pant and Shastri and Gulzari Lal Nanda, who are all very prominent figures.
[Amit Varma]: And my sense of reading about the politics of this entire period was that unlike today,
[Amit Varma]: when the Congress, you know, does some kind of soft Hindutva, but that's just posturing
[Amit Varma]: and basically, they don't have leaders like that anymore.
[Amit Varma]: That in those days, the Hindu nationalist element within the Congress was really quite
[Guest]: strong.
[Guest]: And it was but all I'm trying to say is that it is important still to make some distinctions
[Guest]: between that element of Hindu nationalist things and the policies of the Hindu Mahasabha
[Guest]: or the RSS at that point of time, right, they were overlaps, you know, it is part of a continuum
[Guest]: of some kind.
[Guest]: But I think particularly with respect to people like Sardar Patel and Rajendra Prasad, I think
[Guest]: it would be, in my opinion, historically sort of, you know, in a sense, incorrect to classify
[Guest]: them as Hindu nationalists in quite that sense.
[Guest]: These two people in particular, I think you're absolutely right that, you know, there were
[Guest]: Govind Nallapant, there was Sampoornanand and again, you know, if the old sort of, you
[Guest]: know, the motto of the Jan Sangh, so to speak, was Hindi, Hindu, Hindustan, right, I mean,
[Guest]: there were many people in the Congress who believed in that trinity of things to come
[Guest]: together, right, especially in the UP Congress, which is why Nehru then has a major showdown
[Guest]: with Parshottam Das Tandon, who's a representative of that kind of views, right.
[Guest]: And, but, but again, my only point is to say that, you know, Jawaharlal Nehru was not a
[Guest]: sort of lone crusader in quite that sense, right.
[Guest]: He believed that certain lines had to be laid down absolutely clearly and should not.
[Guest]: And one of the key things, for instance, you know, his discussion with Rajendra Prasad
[Guest]: about the Somnath temple inauguration, right, you know, because the president sort of wants
[Guest]: to go and inaugurate the Somnath temple.
[Guest]: And again, you know, immediately after the accession of Junagadh, when the first speech
[Guest]: is given by Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel, he says the Somnath temple is going to be built again,
[Guest]: right.
[Guest]: He makes a promise at that point of time.
[Guest]: So there are all of these kinds of strains that someone like Nehru has to deal with,
[Guest]: right.
[Guest]: And he, of course, wants to make sure that as the government of India, they are trying
[Guest]: to remain as true as possible to the secular identity of the state and not sort of compromise
[Guest]: that by doing various kinds of things.
[Guest]: But I think it may be a little sort of unfair to say that, you know, he's the only person.
[Guest]: It's in that context that I'd like to say that when you're pointing out rightly that,
[Guest]: you know, there are two or three instances when Nehru feels that, listen, I should just
[Guest]: get away from this, it's partly because he just feels that the instinct within his party
[Guest]: is to still believe that in the wake of partition, the Muslims of India should carry some extra
[Guest]: burden to sort of prove their loyalty to the state.
[Guest]: That is something that he cannot countenance.
[Guest]: He says, yes, Pakistan was created in the name of these people.
[Guest]: But there are millions of Muslims who have chosen for whatever reasons to remain in this
[Guest]: country.
[Guest]: And if we have to be true to our values, then we have to sort of not expect them to prove
[Guest]: their loyalty to us.
[Guest]: That is something that he detests.
[Guest]: And he says that time and again, this idea that, you know, they should somehow be punished
[Guest]: or that anything happens to Hindus in Pakistan, Muslims in India should be punished for that,
[Guest]: right, is totally abhorrent to me.
[Guest]: He says that repeatedly that, you know, I just cannot stand this line of thinking.
[Guest]: So there were those kinds of differences.
[Guest]: But I would still say that, you know, it might be going a little too far to sort of classify
[Guest]: people like Patel as Hindu nationalists at that point of time.
[Guest]: I mean, there was definitely Patel, I think, in the wake of partition felt that there was
[Guest]: an extra obligation on Muslims to sort of, in fact, he says that even in the Constituent
[Guest]: Assembly, right, when there is this discussion on doing away with communal legislatures
[Guest]: and so on.
[Guest]: He comes out and says, he says that, you know, you guys have sort of, this is what has led
[Guest]: to the creation of Pakistan.
[Guest]: Why do you want to continue with this stuff?
[Guest]: The best thing is for you to prove your loyalty to the state by sort of doing away with that
[Guest]: stuff.
[Guest]: Muslims accept it, right?
[Guest]: And that continues, right?
[Guest]: So the separate representation for Muslims in legislature goes away.
[Guest]: So Patel is quite forthright.
[Guest]: And again, I think what is interesting is that you had a government at that point of
[Guest]: time where these discussions happened quite openly, right?
[Guest]: People's allegiances to various kinds of things were well known.
[Guest]: There were differences which were articulated.
[Guest]: And Jawaharlal Nehru stuck to the line that, listen, whatever be the historical reasons
[Guest]: for the creation of Pakistan, the Muslims of India cannot carry that cross forever.
[Guest]: And that any state which expects them to do that is not being fair to them.
[Amit Varma]: No, and I think I accidentally touched upon a hot button during this digression because
[Amit Varma]: these days, of course, there is a binary around Patel because the Hindu right is trying to
[Amit Varma]: claim him as one of their own.
[Amit Varma]: So it becomes a binary, is he a Hindu nationalist, is he a Gandhian?
[Amit Varma]: And the thing is, people contain multitudes and he more than others behave with great
[Amit Varma]: responsibility when he was in government.
[Amit Varma]: But my limited question was that in the sort of in the context of India's battle to sort
[Amit Varma]: of, you know, form the union to bring all these states in, a contention is made by many
[Amit Varma]: in the Hindu right today that he would have behaved differently on Kashmir.
[Amit Varma]: And as you've already pointed out, in the instance of POK or Azad Kashmir, whatever
[Amit Varma]: you call it, that's not exactly the case.
[Amit Varma]: They were on the same page.
[Amit Varma]: And it was, in fact, pretty much the consensus within the Indian administration then that
[Amit Varma]: it is not even possible for our army to retake those areas.
[Guest]: So the whole question is, in fact, I would go further.
[Guest]: If you look at the historical record, it is very clear that when Patel was looking at
[Guest]: the issue of Hyderabad immediately after independence and Nizam was sort of doing this and the issue
[Guest]: of Kashmir came, Patel and he said later on in a public speech, actually in the same speech
[Guest]: in Junagadh when he announces the Somnath temple would be recreated and so on.
[Guest]: He says that we had told the Pakistanis that you give Kashmir and we'll give Hyderabad.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: Why?
[Guest]: Because Patel understood that holding on to Hyderabad was much more important than holding
[Guest]: on to Kashmir.
[Guest]: So this idea that in retrospect that, you know, Patel would have attached some extraordinary
[Guest]: great importance to Kashmir, etc. is, I think, part of an ideological fantasy, which remains
[Guest]: that, you know, all of Kashmir should have been taken by India militarily.
[Guest]: The reality is that as Prime Minister, Patel would have been faced with the same kinds
[Guest]: of resource, logistical, geographic, strategic, political, international political constraints
[Guest]: that Jawaharlal Nehru operated in.
[Guest]: And let us not face, forget it, Patel was very much party to each of these decisions.
[Guest]: Yeah, exactly.
[Guest]: He was there.
[Guest]: All of these decisions were taken, this thing, those records are available for historians
[Guest]: or anyone interested to go and look it up.
[Guest]: And I think the case is absolutely clear that on all of these decisions, Patel ultimately
[Guest]: was on board.
[Guest]: Maybe they had differences of opinion about whether the Indian army should move into Hyderabad
[Guest]: in April, as opposed to when they moved in later on in the year, right?
[Guest]: But there was no difference of opinion that ultimately, if that's what it came down to,
[Guest]: it would have to be done, which is why in response to your previous counterfactual question,
[Guest]: I said, if Nehru had been forced with a choice, he still would have used force because I think
[Guest]: that is the way the situation was shaping up at that point of time.
[Guest]: And I don't think it is at all plausible to suggest that if you had a different kind of
[Guest]: a thing, as I said, even Shama Prasad Mukherjee in later on accepted that as a member of the
[Guest]: cabinet, he was very much party to these decisions as anyone else because these were discussed
[Guest]: and cabinet taken.
[Guest]: These were not unilaterally taken by Nehru or by Patel and Nehru between the two of them.
[Amit Varma]: Right.
[Amit Varma]: And one thing that also happens like, okay, so, you know, Junagadh and Hyderabad are kind
[Amit Varma]: of sorted, Kashmir is still simmering.
[Amit Varma]: And meanwhile, violence breaks out in Bengal.
[Amit Varma]: And again, this is something that is largely forgotten today, but is key to how it shaped
[Amit Varma]: Nehru's later tactical strategic response rather to do what to do about the Kashmir
[Guest]: issue.
[Guest]: Tell me a little bit about that.
[Guest]: So, the Bengal sort of, you know, crisis really comes up in 1950.
[Guest]: There is a sort of communal violence against Hindus who are a substantial majority in what
[Guest]: was East Bengal or East Pakistan, today Bangladesh.
[Guest]: And there was a flow of refugees from there.
[Guest]: And then in response, there was sort of retaliatory violence against Muslims in West Bengal, right.
[Guest]: And that is exactly the dynamic that was prevalent at that point of time.
[Guest]: And again, we tend to forget it.
[Guest]: And the issue took such magnitude that the Indian government finally had to threaten
[Guest]: Pakistan that if the minorities of Kashmir in Pakistan were not protected, they may have
[Guest]: to resort to force in order to sort of get in sort of this issue, so to speak.
[Guest]: Again, Nehru and Patel were on somewhat different lines of this thing, because Nehru felt that,
[Guest]: you know, the use of force is something that can actually have negative consequences, not
[Guest]: something that we should rush into.
[Guest]: I don't think Patel disagreed with that proposition, per se.
[Guest]: But where they've sort of differed from each other was on this question of saying that,
[Guest]: listen, is retributive violence against Muslims in India, something that the government of
[Guest]: India should also countenance?
[Guest]: Or is it our job to sort of say that, listen, even that is not acceptable, right?
[Guest]: So it is actually on that issue.
[Guest]: And it's in that context that actually Nehru writes a very interesting letter to Patel.
[Guest]: He says that there is a constant call for vicarious punishment of Muslims in India,
[Guest]: in response to what is happening to Hindus in Pakistan.
[Guest]: And that to me is abhorrent, because many of those calls are coming from congressmen
[Guest]: also, right, local congressmen in the Bengal Congress, etc, were pointing out.
[Guest]: So in that context, you know, Jawaharlal Nehru felt that ultimately that crisis was averted.
[Guest]: The two countries did not go to war.
[Guest]: But what you had was a pact affirming that both sides will protect the rights of minorities,
[Guest]: which is known as the Nehru-Liaquat pact, which was done.
[Guest]: And actually it is in response to that pact that Shama Prasad Mukherjee and KC Neogi,
[Guest]: whose other leader, they resigned from the cabinet.
[Guest]: And Mukherjee then sort of starts up his own party, the Jana Sangh, the following year.
[Guest]: And that whole episode has a certain kind of implication for Kashmir, primarily through
[Guest]: the sort of impact that it has on Sheikh Abdullah, right, because what Sheikh Abdullah realizes
[Guest]: is that the communal problem in India still remains unsettled.
[Guest]: The position of Muslims within the Indian case itself is always something that is problematic.
[Guest]: And once Shama Prasad Mukherjee and the Jana Sangh begin this sort of national campaign
[Guest]: to say that the autonomy of Jammu and Kashmir should be done away with and the state should
[Guest]: be fully integrated, etc., then Sheikh Abdullah starts worrying about what does it mean to
[Guest]: be integrated within India, where Nehru actually seems, as you're saying, like a lone crusader
[Guest]: for secularism, when so many other mainstream voices are calling actually for second class
[Guest]: treatment of Muslims, to put it, you know, in no fine terms.
[Amit Varma]: And one of the things Nehru sort of did here, which you've pointed out affected how he also
[Amit Varma]: then looked at the Kashmir dispute later, is that there was a massive buildup of troops
[Amit Varma]: on the Indian side, which was partly to, you know, get the Pakistanis to do what you want
[Amit Varma]: to do, without actually taking the decision to go to war because he was he was still hesitant
[Amit Varma]: about that.
[Amit Varma]: But he was not hesitant at, you know, showcasing that force, so to say.
[Guest]: No, it isn't that sense that I say that, you know, you have to understand Nehru was standing
[Guest]: at the juncture of the liberal and realist traditions in thinking about international
[Guest]: politics, right?
[Guest]: Because he knew that this was such an important situation as such a grave situation where
[Guest]: hundreds of thousands of, you know, Hindus are coming from this thing, there is a huge
[Guest]: sort of cauldron boiling up in India itself, and already some Muslims are being attacked
[Guest]: and moving in the other direction, that if you have to sort of prevent a recurrence of
[Guest]: 1947 type violence, which happened in the Punjab, then you had to sort of compel the
[Guest]: Pakistanis in some ways to see reason and put an end to those things, which only they
[Guest]: could do, right?
[Guest]: And it is in that context that he said, yes, if the threat of force is what we have to
[Guest]: do, then let's move towards that.
[Guest]: And even as he moved towards that, he understood that if this really escalated into a conflict,
[Guest]: then the outcome might be actually quite similar to what you have.
[Guest]: Now, this is how strategic choices typically presented themselves to someone like him at
[Guest]: that point of time, right?
[Guest]: There were no easy choices to make, the trade-offs were always very difficult.
[Guest]: And Nehru wanted to balance the trade-offs between realist considerations of saying,
[Guest]: force is one instrument which we have to shape Pakistan's thinking about this, to sensitize
[Guest]: them that if they do not get the situation under control, it's going to sort of lead
[Guest]: to a major conflict with India.
[Guest]: But at the same time, we want to avoid the possibility of an actual conflict because
[Guest]: that conflict will mean other kinds of costs, not just for India, but for the people of
[Guest]: India, right?
[Guest]: So in that sense, he had to sort of constantly balance between these two considerations.
[Guest]: And it is in that sense that I was framing Nehru as a person who stood not at the crossroads
[Guest]: of these kinds of traditions, you know, about thinking about the role of force.
[Amit Varma]: This kind of sort of showcasing the use of force without actually, you know, crossing
[Amit Varma]: the border and going to the other side is sort of, you know, a tool that's been used
[Amit Varma]: by different Prime Ministers at different times, like Indira Gandhi, if I remember correctly,
[Amit Varma]: we discussed in our Bangladesh episode, sort of used it, you know, just before the war
[Amit Varma]: officially erupted, even though, you know, it kind of goaded the Pakistanis into making
[Amit Varma]: the first move there.
[Amit Varma]: And Prime Minister Vajpayee did it after the parliament attacks, where the whole idea was
[Amit Varma]: not that we are going to attack, but that we are going to, with sufficient credibility,
[Amit Varma]: said that we might attack so that the international community steps in and puts pressure on Pakistan.
[Amit Varma]: When it came to Kashmir, was the international community a big factor?
[Guest]: Well, again, it's the same thing, right?
[Guest]: I mean, if you look at the 1950 Bengal crisis, ultimately, it got resolved because India
[Guest]: conveyed to the British and Americans that if Pakistan did not bring the situation under
[Guest]: control, then our hands will be forced, right?
[Guest]: So in that sense, you still had to get the external and to be completely candid with
[Guest]: you, you know, this might tell you how historians typically tend to choose subjects and so on.
[Guest]: My interest in studying the Bengal crisis of 1950, and this book came out of work, which
[Guest]: I did as a doctoral student, actually was shaped by the, you know, 2001 and 2002 crisis
[Guest]: between India and Pakistan, when the Indian Army had been mobilized, and I was myself
[Guest]: mobilized as part of that mobilization.
[Guest]: So when the infantry Yeah, so when I sort of left the army, one of the things I wanted
[Guest]: to study was precisely the role of such coercive use of force and in solving various crises.
[Guest]: And I want to go back in time and look at what are the other crises and one of the first
[Guest]: thing that I stumbled upon was this Bengal crisis, which nobody had studied.
[Guest]: So that's how I actually sort of picked it up.
[Amit Varma]: So you're right.
[Amit Varma]: So we're all sort of lucky, I guess, that you were in the infantry.
[Amit Varma]: So let's kind of go through I mean, before we go in for a break, and then come out on
[Amit Varma]: the other side of the break for Article 370, which is what I'm sure all the listeners are
[Amit Varma]: waiting for, though, this is also pretty fascinating.
[Amit Varma]: Let's kind of then go through the 1953 period, when you know, in the meantime, what seems
[Amit Varma]: to happen is that you describe the assassination of Liaquat as one of those happenstance moments,
[Amit Varma]: which kind of, you know, the cauldron from just burning, you know, just simmers after
[Amit Varma]: that, basically.
[Amit Varma]: And then we kind of reach a status quo, which exists for a long time.
[Guest]: Tell me about that process.
[Guest]: So again, you know, in 1950, India and Pakistan were almost at war over this Bengal crisis.
[Guest]: And in 1951, once again, there is a standoff over Kashmir.
[Guest]: And this time, the concern on the Indian side was that the Pakistanis they get intelligence
[Guest]: reason Pakistanis are planning another sort of quick attack in Kashmir, just around the
[Guest]: time when the Kashmir Constituent Assembly was getting down to work.
[Guest]: And they believe that they want to do that in order to disrupt that process.
[Guest]: And the Indians once again mobilized the Indian army now against West Pakistan, to say that
[Guest]: if you are going to sort of, you know, attack Kashmir or anything like that, then you know,
[Guest]: we are good.
[Guest]: So it that crisis again, plays out for a while.
[Guest]: And Liaquat Ali Khan, who's the Prime Minister of Pakistan at that point of time, in fact,
[Guest]: is assassinated at the height of the crisis by a Pakistani sort of an Afghan assassin,
[Guest]: who was a Pashtun.
[Amit Varma]: And it's never quite clear why he was assassinated.
[Amit Varma]: He's killed by the crowd immediately.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Guest]: So it's one of those things which remains unanswered even to date.
[Guest]: But I think it's an important moment in the evolution of Pakistan's own history.
[Guest]: Because you know, the reality of Pakistan was that Muhammad Ali Jinnah died in 1948.
[Guest]: Three years later, Liaquat Ali Khan, who was the second most important leader in that country
[Guest]: died.
[Guest]: And that in a sense, unmoored the sort of government and the constitution making process
[Guest]: and made things a lot more difficult, you know, when when you lose two very important
[Guest]: leaders in succession, just think that if India had lost, not just Sardar Patel, but
[Guest]: Jawaharlal Nehru in 1951, maybe, you know, things would have been very different, right?
[Guest]: So it's it's in that context that, you know, I was suggesting that Liaquat's assassination
[Guest]: was a very important moment.
[Guest]: But it was also an important moment, in the sense that it made the Kashmir issue a lot
[Guest]: more complicated to resolve, because there were no sort of, you know, serious leadership
[Amit Varma]: on the Pakistani side to be able to take over.
[Amit Varma]: And they were worried for a while that some random crazies might take over.
[Guest]: Exactly.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: I mean, it was just not clear what is going to happen, and so on.
[Guest]: But in all of this context is what then the subsequent moves between New Delhi and Srinagar
[Guest]: really play out.
[Guest]: But I think, you know, before we get into that, we should just wind back in time and
[Guest]: talk a little bit about how exactly that relationship shaped up from 1947 onwards.
[Amit Varma]: So, let's take a quick commercial break.
[Amit Varma]: And we'll come back after the break, talk about that relationship since 1947 and Article
[Amit Varma]: 370.
[Unknown]: Hello, and welcome to another awesome week at the IVM podcast network.
[Unknown]: If you're not following us on social media, please do.
[Unknown]: We are at IVM podcast on Twitter, Facebook, Instagram.
[Unknown]: Don't forget to take a screenshot of whatever podcast of ours that you're listening to.
[Unknown]: Take a screenshot and put in a comment about what you think about the show and we will
[Unknown]: reshare it from our social media pages.
[Unknown]: Here's what's in store for you this week.
[Unknown]: On Cyrus Says, Cyrus is joined by Chef Vinesh Johny, co-founder of Levon Academy.
[Unknown]: He talks to Cyrus about what goes into running a pastry school and how his life led him to
[Unknown]: be a pastry chef.
[Unknown]: On Gandantra, hosts Alok and Sarayu are joined by Dr. Andrew Whitehead to discuss the various
[Unknown]: implications of the repeal of Article 370 and the complicated history and future of
[Unknown]: Kashmir.
[Unknown]: On 9XM Soundcast, host Eva Bhatt is in conversation with music composer and singer Clinton Cerejo.
[Unknown]: Clinton shares his journey from producing ad jingles to composing Bollywood soundtracks
[Unknown]: and being invited to Berklee School of Music.
[Unknown]: On Paperback, Rachaita and Satyajit talk to playwright and poet Nikhil Katara about absurd
[Unknown]: plays and Kafka's letters that have influenced him.
[Unknown]: On the Pragati Podcast, Sambit Das joins Pawan Srinath to talk about medical education and
[Unknown]: the NMC Act.
[Unknown]: Just a little announcement, the new episodes of Pragati Podcast will be available every
[Unknown]: Wednesday starting next week.
[Unknown]: On the Edges & Sledges Cricket Podcast, Varun, Ashwin and DJ are discussing England's struggle
[Unknown]: in the ashes, Nathan Leone's performance, the retirements of Dale Steyn, Hashim Amla
[Unknown]: and Brandon McCallum, and also the India-West Indies T20 matches.
[Unknown]: On Mr. & Mrs. Binge Watch, Janice and Anirudh talk about The Great Hack, The Loudest Voice
[Unknown]: and The Final Year, stories that have starred Donald Trump.
[Unknown]: On Marbles Lost and Found, Zain and Avanti talk to former IVM staffer Janam Dewan about
[Unknown]: grief and loss.
[Unknown]: And with that, let's get you back onto your show.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome back to The Scene and The Unseen, I'm chatting with Srinath Raghavan about
[Amit Varma]: Kashmir and Article 370 and we've been speaking about Kashmir and Junagadh and Hyderabad and
[Amit Varma]: Bengal and Sardar Patel and Hindu Nationalists for more than an hour, but finally we have
[Amit Varma]: got to 370.
[Amit Varma]: Now tell me if my summation of how 370 kind of came about is broadly correct, so we get
[Amit Varma]: to the subject.
[Amit Varma]: In 1947, there was a thing called the Indian Independence Act, which empowered the Governor
[Amit Varma]: General of India, which was then Lord Mountbatten to adapt the Government of India Act 1935
[Amit Varma]: as an interim constitution, and then to negotiate with princely states on how they would accede
[Amit Varma]: to India, which as you pointed out, VP Menon, who was one of the drivers of that working
[Amit Varma]: with Sardar Patel put together this basic thing that okay, we'll look after defence
[Amit Varma]: and foreign affairs and communications for you and blah, blah, blah.
[Amit Varma]: And Kashmir signed an instrument of accession in October 1947, where basically the caveat
[Amit Varma]: was that this is provisional till the will of the people can be ascertained and Sheikh
[Amit Varma]: Abdullah was then called to the Constituent Assembly and Article 370 was then formulated
[Amit Varma]: and though Article 370 as people point out correctly exists since the constitution does
[Amit Varma]: in 1950.
[Amit Varma]: It basically formalized what the instrument of accession signed in 1947 already does.
[Amit Varma]: Is that a correct summation?
[Guest]: Yes, broadly.
[Guest]: The only thing I would say is that, you know, when Sheikh Abdullah was and his colleagues
[Guest]: were asked to sort of join the Indian Constituent Assembly, part of the thing you wanted to
[Guest]: do was to formalize the relationship of Kashmir with the Union of India and to ensure that
[Guest]: the Indian Constitution reflected it because what had happened previously was an instrument
[Guest]: of accession, which had been signed by the Maharaja and, you know, accepted by the Government
[Guest]: of India, but you wanted to sort of make sure that the Constitution of India as it takes
[Guest]: shape will reflect this relationship.
[Guest]: Now the negotiations, which led to ultimately the creation of Article 370, it was actually
[Guest]: called 306A in the draft of the constitution, basically stretched out over five months because
[Guest]: what Sheikh Abdullah and his team wanted was to ensure that Kashmir will continue to have
[Guest]: considerable autonomy because it is only on that condition that he might be able to persuade
[Guest]: his people that it was better to join India than to join Pakistan.
[Guest]: And we've already discussed his incentives, all the considerations in front of him.
[Guest]: So the way in which Article 370 eventually sort of came up was that it says that the
[Guest]: Government of India is empowered to legislate for the state of Jammu and Kashmir on the
[Guest]: three subjects of accession.
[Guest]: If it wants to sort of extend any further provisions of the Indian constitution to that
[Guest]: state, then Article 370 is the vehicle through which those provisions can be extended to
[Guest]: the constitution of and made applicable to the state of Jammu and Kashmir.
[Guest]: But here there are a series of caveats which are built in, which is what safeguard the
[Guest]: autonomy of the state of Jammu and Kashmir.
[Guest]: The first caveat is to say that if the President of India issues a presidential order under
[Guest]: Article 370, you know, extending any provisions which pertain to the three subjects already
[Guest]: occurred, he only needs the sort of concurrence of the state government, right?
[Guest]: If he wants to sort of extend any other provisions of the Indian constitution to that state,
[Guest]: then it will need not just a sort of a straightforward concurrence, but a subsequent approval by
[Guest]: the constituent assembly of the JNK state itself.
[Guest]: So in a sense, the ultimate body which decided which other provisions of the Indian constitution
[Guest]: beyond the three things reflected in the instrument of accession would be applicable to the state
[Guest]: of JNK would be the state's own constituent assembly.
[Guest]: It is in that sense that self-determination was offered to the Kashmiris and autonomy
[Guest]: was guaranteed to them.
[Guest]: Because the Indian Union could not unilaterally sort of extend provisions using Article 370,
[Guest]: but you had to get the state's constituent assembly to ratify and accept those provisions.
[Guest]: And the assumption was that once the state's constituent assembly completed its task of
[Guest]: making the constitution of the state, it would spell out which of the provisions of the Indian
[Guest]: constitution it wants to accept.
[Guest]: And thereafter, no further provisions will be applicable to the state.
[Guest]: It is in that sense that Article 370 is referred to as temporary provisions for the state of
[Guest]: JNK.
[Guest]: The idea was not that you would remove Article 370 and make it permanent, but that the permanent
[Guest]: contours would only emerge once the state's constituent assembly met, framed the constitution
[Guest]: of the state and decided what parts of the Indian constitution are we willing to accept.
[Guest]: So this was the provision for autonomy and a form of sort of self-determination for the
[Guest]: Kashmiri people, because it was their constituent assembly, which would decide what beyond the
[Guest]: three subjects they would accept as far as the relationship with India was concerned.
[Amit Varma]: Right, so to kind of sum it up and tell me if I've done it correctly, again, I'll quote
[Amit Varma]: Gulzari Nanda, where he talks about 370, where he said in the 60s, quote, the only way of
[Amit Varma]: taking the constitution of India into Jammu and Kashmir is through the application of
[Amit Varma]: Article 370.
[Amit Varma]: It is a tunnel.
[Amit Varma]: It is through this tunnel that a good deal of traffic has already passed and more will,
[Amit Varma]: stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And as you're pointing out, where India had jurisdiction as far as the state of Jammu
[Amit Varma]: and Kashmir is concerned is the three subjects of defense, foreign affairs and communication.
[Amit Varma]: Anything else would need the approval of the state government and the constituent assembly.
[Amit Varma]: And the constituent assembly, by the time it wound up, which it did deliberately where
[Amit Varma]: it announced that on so and so a date, I think 1957, 56, you know, by the time it wound up,
[Amit Varma]: the lines that it would have demarcated would remain forever.
[Amit Varma]: And also that any change in Article 370 would have to happen with the agreement of the Constituent
[Amit Varma]: Assembly of J&K, which basically means that by the time it has ceased to exist, no further
[Amit Varma]: change can happen.
[Amit Varma]: And Article 370, therefore, is supposed to be sort of permanent at this point in time.
[Amit Varma]: Now, this is kind of complicated because again, there's a quote I picked up from A. G. Noorani's
[Amit Varma]: book on Article 370, where he quotes, Nehru is saying that Article 370, quote, has been
[Amit Varma]: eroded, this is Nehru speaking, has been eroded, if I may use the word, and many things have
[Amit Varma]: been done in the last few years, which have made the relationship of Kashmir with the
[Amit Varma]: Union of India very close.
[Amit Varma]: There is no doubt that Kashmir is fully integrated, stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And I was struggling to kind of make sense of this, both in terms of what he meant by
[Amit Varma]: eroded, and what, you know, defenders of the current move say that Nehru himself through
[Amit Varma]: a series of presidential orders essentially made 370 almost irrelevant.
[Amit Varma]: And also, I'm not sure what Nehru meant by Kashmir being fully integrated.
[Guest]: So the first thing is this, right.
[Guest]: And that is where I think we need to get to the grips with the history of what happens
[Guest]: to Article 370 after it is embodied in the Constitution, right?
[Guest]: Because by the time you come to Gulzarilal Nanda, a lot of water has flowed in the Jhelum
[Guest]: under the bridges of, you know, JNK.
[Guest]: Now, Article 370 is adopted as part of the Indian Constitution in 1950, 26th of January
[Guest]: 1950, the Constitution comes into effect.
[Guest]: Now, by the end of 1950, the JNK State Constituent Assembly is getting ready to come together
[Guest]: to form the Constitution of the state.
[Guest]: And as we know, that is going to be the ultimate body which will decide what provisions of
[Guest]: the Indian Constitution beyond the three subjects would be acceptable.
[Guest]: Now even as the JNK State Constituent Assembly starts meeting, Sheikh Abdullah is a little
[Guest]: impatient to change some aspects of the status quo.
[Guest]: In particular, he wants to dislodge the Maharaja of Kashmir as the hereditary ruler of the
[Guest]: state.
[Guest]: He has a long standing problem with the Maharaja.
[Guest]: So what he presses upon Nehru is to say that, why don't you issue a presidential order under
[Guest]: Article 370, effectively saying that the Maharaja's position will be taken over by an elected
[Guest]: Sadre Riyasat, who will be Maharaja's son, Dr. Karan Singh would take over that position
[Guest]: and so on.
[Guest]: It is in that context, actually, that Nehru and Sheikh Abdullah get into a protracted
[Guest]: correspondence because Nehru says that, you know, the Maharaja of Kashmir is actually
[Guest]: recognized by the President of India in the Indian Constitution.
[Guest]: So if you want to do away with him, then we have to at least broadly decide what the contours
[Guest]: of the relationship between India and Srinagar should be, or, you know, between New Delhi
[Guest]: and Srinagar should be, which actually is a task which is left to the Constituent Assembly.
[Guest]: But he says, we must accept some guidelines, which is then your responsibility to make
[Guest]: sure the Constituent Assembly fleshes it out and gives effects to that understanding.
[Guest]: Because you are asking for changes even before the Constituent Assembly has started its business.
[Guest]: So if we have to, if we want to, I can't do this piecemeal because this will have implications
[Guest]: constitutionally.
[Guest]: So we have to do a few other things.
[Guest]: So it is in that context that as part of negotiations between the two sides, they come to something
[Guest]: called a Delhi Agreement of 1952, whereby the two sides try and align their positions
[Guest]: on what the autonomy of JNK will mean as far as accepting various provisions of the Indian
[Guest]: Constitution or not.
[Guest]: They don't get into very great detail, but they say what are broadly the kinds of things
[Guest]: that will be acceptable, right?
[Guest]: Like, so for instance, you know, the idea that JNK state will have its own flag, you
[Guest]: know, it is going to have, you know, various kinds of things, right?
[Guest]: So that is what the 1952 agreement really is about.
[Guest]: And the 1952 agreement, at least as far as Jawaharlal Nehru is concerned, enables a synchronization
[Guest]: of the constitutions of India and the future constitution of JNK.
[Guest]: It lays down certain markers that both sides will agree when they are thinking about this
[Guest]: relationship, right?
[Guest]: But Sheikh Abdullah has two problems.
[Guest]: First, the agreement actually does not go down all that well in Srinagar.
[Guest]: Because people believe that Sheikh Abdullah has somewhat preemptively undermined the autonomous
[Guest]: authority of the Constituent Assembly of JNK.
[Guest]: And that he has somehow sort of, you know, indulged in a bit of a sell off to this thing.
[Guest]: And this is against the context when plebiscite is still a possibility, many other things
[Guest]: are in the air, right?
[Guest]: UN is still hotly debating this issue.
[Guest]: So that's the problem.
[Guest]: The second problem for Sheikh Abdullah is that the Janasang and Shama Prasad Mukherjee
[Guest]: take the Delhi agreement as a major target.
[Guest]: But in order to this, right, and the slogan of the time was that, ek desh mein doh vidhan,
[Guest]: doh nishan, doh pradhan, right?
[Guest]: Two constitutions, two flags, and two sort of rulers, Sadr-e-Riyasat as well as the president
[Guest]: should not be.
[Guest]: Nahi chalega, nahi chalega.
[Guest]: Right?
[Guest]: That was the thing.
[Guest]: So they really targeted the 1952 accord.
[Guest]: And Sheikh Abdullah thereafter became very, very worried about whether India will actually
[Guest]: be able to sort of guarantee Kashmir's autonomy in perpetuity.
[Guest]: Or are these forces of the Hindu right really going to come?
[Guest]: And it's in that context that you know, actually Jawaharlal Nehru writes letters and makes
[Guest]: speeches.
[Guest]: He says, why should the Kashmiris be part of India, if the Janasang and RSS are going
[Guest]: to be in the driver's seat?
[Guest]: Because they know very well that these guys are going to erode any autonomy that is left
[Amit Varma]: there.
[Amit Varma]: Right?
[Amit Varma]: And the Hindu right is not just from India, it's also the Praja Parishad in Jammu, like
[Guest]: you pointed out, which is doing a lot of stuff there.
[Guest]: By now, they have been sort of co-opted into this thing, right? and there are other elements
[Guest]: like the Sadr Ariyasat himself, who's a former ruler's son, Dr. Karan Singh, who has conflicted
[Guest]: views about various things.
[Guest]: Right?
[Guest]: I mean, he presents everything as if the people of Jammu have different aspirations that are
[Guest]: different.
[Guest]: But he's also a factor in this game.
[Guest]: And there is a third factor, which is a group of influential sort of Kashmiri pandits, who
[Guest]: are associates of Sheikh Abdullah, but eventually then start doubting Sheikh Abdullah's own
[Guest]: motives.
[Guest]: There is a man who would later became a very influential player in under Mrs. Indira Gandhi
[Guest]: called D.P.
[Guest]: Dhar.
[Guest]: D.P.
[Amit Varma]: Dhar became India's ambassador to the Soviet Union during the 1971 crisis.
[Amit Varma]: Entirely discussed him in our Bangladesh episode.
[Amit Varma]: Exactly.
[Guest]: So everything comes together.
[Guest]: You can see how some of these characters have never let go of me for the last 15 years.
[Guest]: Right?
[Guest]: So D.P.
[Guest]: Dhar was one of those people.
[Guest]: And it is this group of people, which is the Sadr Ariyasat Karan Singh, some of Sheikh Abdullah's
[Guest]: own associates, including others, and this is not a Hindu Muslim thing, right?
[Guest]: I mean, there are some like D.P.
[Guest]: Dhar, but there are others like, you know, Bakshri Ghulam Muhammad, who is effectively
[Guest]: number two, who believe that the line that Abdullah is now sort of treading, which is
[Guest]: to say, listen, let's look for some kind of a different status for Kashmir, which we discussed,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: He wanted some kind of an agreement between India and Pakistan, guaranteeing some kind
[Guest]: of independent status for Kashmir, etc, etc, was the wrong thing to do.
[Guest]: Right?
[Guest]: And Abdullah, of course, is reacting to these two things.
[Guest]: One to the unpopularity of the Delhi Agreement within his own thing, second to the attack
[Guest]: on the Delhi Agreement being mounted by the Janasangh and others sort of, you know, approving
[Guest]: of that.
[Guest]: And then, of course, Shama Prasad Mukherjee dies in a sort of a jail in Srinagar.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: Post all of that, Sheikh Abdullah then becomes very nervous and starts making all of these
[Guest]: different kinds of moves.
[Guest]: He starts meeting the American ambassador, Nehru through his intelligence agencies, gets
[Guest]: to know influential people like Karan Singh and D.P.
[Guest]: Dhar and Bakshi Ghulam Muhammad are plotting behind the scenes to prepare the way for Sheikh
[Guest]: Abdullah's departure.
[Guest]: They convinced Jawaharlal Nehru that Abdullah has to be gotten rid of.
[Guest]: Yeah, there is actually a very, very interesting letter, which I found much later in the archives
[Guest]: of P.N.
[Guest]: Haksar, who was Mrs. Gandhi's principal secretary.
[Guest]: Another Bangladesh protagonist.
[Guest]: This is from 1972.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: This is in the context of what later became the Simla Accords and stuff.
[Guest]: And Haksar at that point of time is a great advocate of some kind of rapprochement with
[Guest]: Sheikh Abdullah.
[Guest]: You know, this is, we're talking about 20 years fast forwarding.
[Guest]: And he says that, I met D.P.
[Guest]: Dhar the other day, and I told him that since he was responsible for the original sin in
[Guest]: Kashmir, maybe he should take the first step to reach out to Sheikh Abdullah.
[Guest]: And the original sin was the imprisonment and arbitrary dismissal of Sheikh Abdullah
[Guest]: in 1953, which frankly was one of those things which led to a, which created a rupture in
[Guest]: the minds of the Muslims of Kashmir valley in particular, because it was seen by them
[Guest]: and remains, continues to be seen by them as an enormous historical betrayal of India's
[Guest]: promise of autonomy to Kashmir because their tallest leader, the person who was sort of
[Guest]: negotiating was arbitrarily removed, arrested and put in prison.
[Guest]: Subsequently various kinds of charges were foisted on him, none of which were sort of
[Guest]: proven in a court of law, but he remained in and out of prisons for a very, very long
[Guest]: period of time.
[Guest]: And I think that sort of ruptured and Nehru himself knew that he was taking a very dangerous
[Guest]: move in sort of dismissing Sheikh Abdullah, but he, against his better judgment allowed
[Guest]: himself to sort of go ahead and do that.
[Guest]: And he was instrumental in that, even though he kept insisting that it was done by the
[Guest]: people on the ground, but historical records suggest otherwise.
[Guest]: Sheikh Lala Nehru was totally in sync with this plan to remove Sheikh Abdullah.
[Guest]: In fact, he dictates a note to his secretary, Emma Mothai, saying, what are the various
[Guest]: steps which have to be taken to ensure that public order is maintained after Abdullah
[Guest]: is removed?
[Guest]: How does he justify it to himself?
[Guest]: Realpolitik, I suppose, right?
[Guest]: I mean, see, when you are in these positions of power, you have certain kinds of principles,
[Guest]: you have this extraordinary friendship with Sheikh Abdullah, you know, various things,
[Guest]: but you just feel like, listen, if I don't act at this point of time in this way, then
[Guest]: maybe the state is going to get out of my control.
[Guest]: And I who have been a great champion and votary of Kashmir being a symbol of India secularism
[Guest]: will then have failed in not just persuading my countrymen to accept it, but in keeping
[Guest]: them in our fold.
[Guest]: Right?
[Guest]: So it's one of those ruthless realpolitik decisions which is taken.
[Guest]: And I think it looks at least as bad in retrospect as it did in prospect.
[Guest]: And I think history has vindicated it to be the single most grievous error made by India
[Guest]: in its dealings with JNK.
[Guest]: I think everything else could have sort of possibly worked out in India's favor, had
[Guest]: this move to depose Sheikh Abdullah in such an arbitrary and, you know, unlawful illegal
[Guest]: manner not been taken.
[Guest]: And it's also worth pointing out that immediately after the arrest of Sheikh Abdullah, there
[Guest]: were popular protests in Kashmir.
[Guest]: And many people were shot and killed in putting down those protests.
[Guest]: It is again because of a news blackout is not something that is reported in mainstream
[Guest]: newspapers of the time, but it's well known.
[Amit Varma]: So what, what were the repercussions of this, like, I don't want to bother you with another
[Amit Varma]: complex counterfactual, but just a sort of a simpler counterfactual question that if
[Amit Varma]: Nehru hadn't done this, what would the best case scenario have been?
[Guest]: Well, the best case scenario would have been to sort of try and persuade Sheikh Abdullah
[Guest]: to sort of, you know, come up with some other kind of an arrangement which would allow him
[Guest]: to sell autonomy to his own people in a strong way.
[Guest]: Because what was Abdullah's problem?
[Guest]: Abdullah's problem was that he believed that in the wake of the rise of the Dhansangh and
[Guest]: these kinds of protests, and you know, they had various kinds of rallies, marches, especially
[Guest]: all of North India.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: He just felt like, you know, it is going to be impossible for me to convince Kashmiri
[Guest]: Muslims that their future in an autonomous fashion is somehow safe in an India of the
[Guest]: sky.
[Guest]: So in a sense, it would have taken a lot.
[Guest]: And maybe Jawaharlal Nehru would have also had to think out creatively.
[Guest]: And again, he did in 1964 on the sort of on literally on his deathbed, Jawaharlal Nehru
[Guest]: attempted to sort of reach out to Sheikh Abdullah, even sent Sheikh Abdullah to Pakistan to say,
[Guest]: you try and explore some settlement, right?
[Guest]: Because by that time, 11 years after that act of 1953, Jawaharlal Nehru was living to
[Guest]: review the day.
[Guest]: Because in essence, what he realized by the time he died was that the Kashmir issue, far
[Guest]: from securing India's secularism, had actually created a huge weapon for Hindu majoritarianism
[Guest]: in this country, because that state's special status could be turned as a weapon against
[Guest]: Muslims, which is exactly what was happening.
[Guest]: Jawaharlal Nehru lived to see the consequences of this, realized that at least if in my lifetime,
[Guest]: I do not make one attempt, it is not very clear what he could have done at that point
[Guest]: of time.
[Guest]: He was old, weak, ailing.
[Guest]: And it is not very clear that anything would have come out of that.
[Guest]: But the mere fact that he did it, I think, was the best gesture of repentance that he
[Guest]: could have bought himself to do, which was to sort of reach out to a man whom he had
[Guest]: imprisoned and said that, listen, you go to Pakistan, you try what can be tried.
[Guest]: In fact, that episode is very well covered in Ramachandra Guha's book, India after Gandhi.
[Guest]: But I think, you know, it came too little too late in the day.
[Amit Varma]: So the, you know, what Nehru did, the one of the political repercussions of that, of
[Amit Varma]: course, which we are feeling to the present day is that it became one of the central causes
[Amit Varma]: for the Hindutva right.
[Amit Varma]: What were the repercussions of it for Kashmir and for Kashmiris?
[Guest]: Well, the important repercussions and that is the point, right?
[Guest]: It is after Sheikh Abdullah's dismissal that Article 370, rather than becoming the guarantee
[Guest]: of Kashmir's autonomy, becomes the instrument through which the will of the central government
[Guest]: is arbitrarily imposed on the state.
[Guest]: Because the first important, big, you know, mega presidential order is given as early
[Guest]: as 1954.
[Guest]: Now, you could say that, you know, the Kashmir Constituent Assembly is still meeting at that
[Guest]: point of time.
[Guest]: So maybe exporting all those provisions was something that they agreed the Kashmir Constituent
[Guest]: Assembly ratified it.
[Guest]: Yeah, so you can say that at least that notion of the letter of the law was at least followed.
[Guest]: But post the meeting, dissolution, promulgation of the constitution of JNK, there is no way
[Guest]: that further provisions of the Indian constitution could be imported to the state under Article
[Guest]: 370.
[Guest]: But that is exactly what was done.
[Guest]: And that is what Jawaharlal Nehru is referring to when he says that more and more things
[Guest]: have been done to integrate the state closer with India.
[Amit Varma]: And he uses the word eroded repeatedly.
[Guest]: It is better in the actual parliamentary debate, because he said it in Hindi.
[Guest]: He said, ye ghiste ghiste ghis jayega.
[Guest]: Then why is it still an issue?
[Guest]: It is only an issue because it became an ideological issue for the Janasan and subsequently for
[Guest]: the BJP.
[Guest]: Because the reality is that as of 5th August 2019, when Article 370 was totally hollowed
[Guest]: out, it is still on the papers of the constitution, right?
[Guest]: It's not gone because taking it out would have other repercussions.
[Guest]: But it was a dead letter.
[Guest]: You could do things to that state through Article 370, which you could not do to any
[Guest]: other state of India.
[Guest]: Like imposing president's rule for a very long period between 1990 and 1996 through
[Guest]: a series of presidential orders, we kept imposing.
[Guest]: You try imposing president rule on any other thing, you need to amend the Indian constitution
[Guest]: to do that.
[Guest]: You don't need to do that with JNK.
[Guest]: So far from being the protector, the shield which protect the economy, it became as Gulzari
[Guest]: Lal Nanda said, a tunnel through which everything could be done to that state, irrespective
[Guest]: of what the wishes of the people were, well, well after the Constituent Assembly of that
[Amit Varma]: state had dissolved.
[Amit Varma]: So what was done on August 5, therefore, is really something which is big for the Hindutva,
[Amit Varma]: right?
[Amit Varma]: Because of his symbolic value in practical terms, it doesn't really make a difference.
[Amit Varma]: India can still do whatever the India could still was still doing whatever the hell it
[Guest]: wanted there.
[Guest]: There are two things, right?
[Guest]: So one is, yes, it is true that India was doing whatever, you know, in a sense, all
[Guest]: kinds of provisions of the Indian constitution were being extended to that state on the name
[Guest]: of this thing.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: And the sad bit is that the Indian Supreme Court never took an unequivocal stand on this
[Guest]: issue.
[Guest]: There is one important ruling where they said that the Constituent Assembly should be the
[Guest]: ultimate ratifying authority.
[Guest]: There is another ruling in which they have said that, you know, maybe the state legislature
[Guest]: can support it.
[Guest]: But what today is happening is that we are being told that the governor can stand in
[Guest]: even for the state legislature.
[Guest]: You're taking the reductio ad absurdum of that argument that a Constituent Assembly,
[Guest]: which is a sovereign body, which has in any scheme of politics, greater powers than a
[Guest]: normal elected legislative assembly today can be said to be equivalent to the governor
[Guest]: of a state which is under President's rule.
[Guest]: Now, that is the extent to which these things have been done.
[Guest]: The second thing which has been of course done under the current move is the reduction
[Guest]: of the state to a union territory status, which is a very different thing.
[Guest]: I think we should come to that in a bit.
[Amit Varma]: We'll come to that.
[Amit Varma]: You know, I'll link to Gautam Bhatia's excellent piece on exactly how the government did the
[Amit Varma]: constitutional higgery-jiggery-pokery by which it sort of did what it did.
[Guest]: But can you briefly summarize what exactly it did?
[Guest]: So the main stumbling block for the government was this provision within Article 370 that
[Guest]: the extension of any other provisions of the Indian Constitution would have to be ratified
[Guest]: by the state's Constituent Assembly.
[Guest]: So what the presidential order which was issued on 5th of August attempts to do is to circumvent
[Guest]: that through a backdoor.
[Guest]: They have said that we will amend Article 367, which is the explanations clause of the
[Guest]: article, to say that for state Constituent Assembly, read state government as advised
[Guest]: by so and so.
[Guest]: And they have made a claim that currently there is no state government there and that
[Guest]: the governor stands in for that.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: So it's a backdoor through which now the problem with that, as Gautam points out in his piece,
[Guest]: is that in effect, what they have done is they have used Article 370 to amend Article
[Guest]: 370 itself, which is highly problematic.
[Guest]: You cannot use any of the provisions of the Constitution to amend itself.
[Guest]: You have to invoke the amendment powers of the Constitution.
[Amit Varma]: Remind me to ask you about Sikkim in 1975, which is a very, I think that's a total rabbit
[Guest]: hole.
[Guest]: Anyway, so, so that is the first thing, right?
[Guest]: So they've done things in an indirect way.
[Guest]: But that is likely to raise a series of constitutional sort of questions, which the courts will have
[Guest]: to sort of decide on whether that is happening.
[Guest]: There is a second problem vis-a-vis how they have sort of gone about doing this, right,
[Guest]: which is to say that the first presidential order that was issued that way, the same day,
[Guest]: the Home Minister tabled another presidential order to get the Parliament's approval, which
[Guest]: basically said that from here on, every other article barring Article, you know, Clause
[Guest]: 1 of 370 stands is to be taken away.
[Guest]: Clause 1 will now say that every article of the Indian Constitution, irrespective of anything
[Guest]: ever done will apply, right?
[Guest]: So it's a dramatic wholesale change of Article 370 itself.
[Guest]: Now that falls into another problem because the original Article 370 states specifically
[Guest]: that Article 1 of the Indian Constitution and Article 370 applied to the state of Jammu
[Guest]: and Kashmir.
[Guest]: If any other provisions of the Constitution have to be applied, then you can use a presidential
[Guest]: order, which only means to say that you cannot extend Article 370 to that state again in
[Guest]: a new form through a presidential order.
[Guest]: Now, this is the reason why it took five months to draft that article.
[Guest]: It is not as if these kind of ideas have been come up with a bunch of geniuses or that could
[Guest]: not have been anticipated at that time.
[Guest]: It is very easily foreseeable that a group of people could have destroyed the autonomy
[Guest]: of the state using Article 370 if these safeguards were not in place, which is why Sheikh Abdullah
[Guest]: negotiated for five months and bought all of these provisions in.
[Guest]: And despite that, NG Iyengar has explained all of these provisions in his sort of speech
[Guest]: in the Constituent Assembly where he tables the article to say this is the provision.
[Guest]: These are the reasons why we are doing all of these things, right?
[Guest]: So in effect, I think, therefore, this raises a whole series of sort of constitutional questions
[Guest]: about the legality of an order like this, which the courts will have to sit on and decide
[Guest]: and deliberate.
[Guest]: But I think there's one more thing which is worth wearing out.
[Guest]: What is the overall consequence of what has been done?
[Guest]: The overall consequence of what has been done is to nullify the constitution of the state
[Guest]: of Jammu and Kashmir.
[Guest]: The position and legitimacy of that constitution was enshrined in the Indian constitution through
[Guest]: Article 370.
[Guest]: It was a provision of the Indian constitution to accept that state's constitution.
[Guest]: Now in effect, we have destroyed that state's constitution wholesale.
[Guest]: Now what does that mean for the basic structure of the constitution, etc., I think is another
[Guest]: issue that constitutional lawyers and the courts will be deliberating in the weeks and
[Amit Varma]: months to come.
[Amit Varma]: What does it mean for Indian federalism?
[Guest]: I think that is where the second part of the whole thing becomes much more difficult, right?
[Guest]: There are two aspects of this question of federalism, which I think we need to deliberate.
[Guest]: One relates to 370 itself, and the second relates to the union territorial sort of creation
[Guest]: of two union territories in what was a Nerstwile state.
[Guest]: Now let's look at 370 itself first.
[Guest]: 370 is not the only part of the Indian constitution which has such asymmetric provisions.
[Guest]: If you read Article 370, and there are many other states which have various kinds of asymmetric
[Guest]: provisions, nor is J&K the only state where you cannot purchase land.
[Guest]: There are many other states which have similar provisions, particularly with respect to agricultural
[Guest]: land.
[Guest]: There are many kinds of ceilings and restrictions about what non-domiciles can and cannot do
[Guest]: in states, right?
[Guest]: These are all parts of the federal provisions of the constitution.
[Guest]: So asymmetric constitutional provisions was a fundamental part of the design of the Indian
[Guest]: constitution because the Indian constitution has simply understood that if you wanted to
[Guest]: deal with a country of such diversity of language, caste, region, religion, etc., etc., I mean,
[Guest]: how are you going to accommodate it if you cannot accommodate for various kinds of diversity?
[Guest]: So as I said, it was never envisaged to be a federal constitution in the technical sense.
[Guest]: It was a unitary state, but a state which had these various kinds of asymmetric relations
[Guest]: with various provinces to capture their specific histories.
[Guest]: Let me just give you one example.
[Guest]: You know, when the BJP came back to power in 2014, you know, one of the main sort of
[Guest]: Markway announcements, which was done, was the announcement that we are going to sign
[Guest]: an agreement with the Nagas, right, which you may recall, the Prime Minister had sort
[Guest]: of made that announcement as a signing ceremony and so on.
[Guest]: And as part of that speech, one of the reasons which she explained why we had to sort of
[Guest]: do this and what the final agreement would look like.
[Guest]: He said that final agreement will recognize the special history of the Naga people, right?
[Guest]: Article 370 did exactly that.
[Guest]: It recognized the special history of this thing.
[Guest]: The various asymmetric province parts of the constitution recognize the fact, you know,
[Guest]: because as a historian, what is striking about India is not that, you know, India is an agglomeration
[Guest]: of various regions, which came together and decided to become a nation.
[Guest]: It's not like Italy and or like Prussia, which became Germany later.
[Guest]: The imaginary of the nation and the imaginary of the region in India are both coeval.
[Guest]: They happen more or less at the same time.
[Guest]: People feel like I'm part of this region and also part of this nation, right?
[Guest]: So in a sense, it is that principle which the Indian constitution tried to capture
[Guest]: by these kinds of various provisions of asymmetry.
[Guest]: So in a sense, we are going against the grain of our own history and the lay of this land.
[Guest]: If we are saying that we have to do away with asymmetric provisions, which is why I was
[Guest]: surprised that, you know, when when the chief minister of Sikkim says that I welcome the
[Guest]: sort of removal of Article 370, but I'm also assured that my special status or my state
[Guest]: is going to remain in place.
[Guest]: I mean, what are the guarantees, right?
[Guest]: If asymmetry does not apply for one, who can assure it for another in a very different
[Amit Varma]: context.
[Amit Varma]: And also, as you pointed out, you know, before we started recording, that there are parties
[Amit Varma]: like the TDP and the TRS, which would expect them to stand up for federalism and, you know,
[Amit Varma]: that's practically the raison d'etre, in a sense, and, and yet, they have welcomed this
[Guest]: move.
[Guest]: So, so I think, so as far as 370 is concerned, and, you know, I think it raises questions
[Guest]: about what happens to the future of this kind of asymmetric character of the Indian constitution,
[Guest]: if it can be eroded in this way.
[Guest]: The second is about the manner in which the state has been reduced to a union territory,
[Guest]: you know, bifurcated and reduced to two union territories.
[Guest]: I think that has very significant consequences and questions it raises about what the nature
[Guest]: of federalism in this country is going to be going forward, right?
[Guest]: In the first place, you know, how do you reorganize a province?
[Guest]: Article three of the Indian constitution lays out what are the things that need to be done.
[Guest]: And that article three actually had a special requirement for JNK, over and above that of
[Guest]: every other state.
[Guest]: For every other state, in order to table a bill for bifurcation of a state, for instance,
[Guest]: what you needed is a concurrence of the sort of, you know, it had to be tabled before the
[Guest]: state legislature.
[Guest]: And then the president could sort of give us approval to be tabled in parliament.
[Guest]: Whereas with the JNK state, it was specifically laid down under article three, that the concurrence
[Guest]: of the state legislature had to be gotten before any such thing could be done.
[Guest]: So it is an additional provision, once again, as part of this extra sort of guarantee of
[Guest]: autonomy and so on.
[Guest]: But you've done away with all of that stuff, right?
[Guest]: Now what have you done?
[Guest]: You have said basically that we don't even need the concurrence of the state government.
[Guest]: The president's appointee who is a governor is enough to give concurrence.
[Guest]: So that is the first thing.
[Guest]: The second thing is that you have said that, you know, you can carve out a state without
[Guest]: any reference to the visuals of the legislature of that state, without even reference to them,
[Guest]: forget asking them for approval, just without any reference, you can do it.
[Guest]: And again, it tells you what are the kinds of things which can be done to a state like
[Guest]: JNK and article 370, because you cannot do the same thing with any other state.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, you did it to a state which had so many protections, and therefore you can basically
[Amit Varma]: So that's the first thing.
[Guest]: The second thing is about saying that what does it mean politically for any government
[Guest]: of India to say that, listen, we can impose president's rule on a state and then say that
[Guest]: the governor's concurrence is sufficient to not just carve out that state, but to reduce
[Guest]: various parts of the state from statehood to union territory status.
[Guest]: So tomorrow, you know, hypothetically, we can think about some other ruling party, which
[Guest]: might be in power, which may decide that in order to take political control of a state,
[Guest]: which we cannot win elections in, we are just going to wait it out, impose president's rule,
[Guest]: bring in a bill, carving out that state into a series of union territories, emasculating
[Guest]: it politically.
[Guest]: And we are done with the thing.
[Guest]: I mean, what a change that would mean for Indian democracy and federalism, you can imagine.
[Guest]: Now, I'm not suggesting that this is going to be replicated, but everything creates some
[Guest]: precedent.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: So we have to think about what kinds of precedents we are setting for ourselves as a country.
[Guest]: If we are going to accept that these are sort of legitimate means of doing democratic business.
[Amit Varma]: And just thinking aloud, I think once you change the rules of the game, you change the
[Amit Varma]: game.
[Amit Varma]: Even if you don't apply those rules necessarily, everybody's incentives change.
[Amit Varma]: Precisely.
[Amit Varma]: So I have sort of three broader questions, which are all things about which I'm genuinely
[Amit Varma]: puzzled.
[Amit Varma]: One, in one case, it is evident that 370 was sort of a compact between the Union of India
[Amit Varma]: and Jammu and Kashmir.
[Amit Varma]: And that we have broken this compact by doing what we have done.
[Amit Varma]: And you could argue that, you know, Nehru himself broke the contact repeatedly.
[Amit Varma]: And what has happened now is just a formalizing of that.
[Amit Varma]: But the larger question here is broken the compact with who?
[Amit Varma]: Because even the original compact wasn't with an elected leaders who represented the will
[Amit Varma]: of the people.
[Amit Varma]: We never knew the will of the people.
[Amit Varma]: I would say we still don't know the will of the people.
[Amit Varma]: And also the will of the people is not a monolithic thing.
[Amit Varma]: Not only are there many different kinds of people with different wills, but also over
[Amit Varma]: a period of time, what the Kashmiri people might want has also changed rapidly, whether
[Amit Varma]: you're talking about 1955, or you're talking about 75, or you're talking about 1990, after
[Amit Varma]: everything kind of blows up, or you're talking about 2007, when things were better, and you're
[Amit Varma]: talking about now when things are really pretty bad.
[Amit Varma]: So the issue is, you know, some people would raise the point, which I have a fair amount
[Amit Varma]: of sympathy for that the current beleaguered young Kashmiri, who views the Indian government
[Amit Varma]: as an oppressive foreign power, if he wants to fight for freedom today, he is basically
[Amit Varma]: not on a lower moral plane than say, a Bhagat Singh or a Chandrashekhar Azad or any of the
[Amit Varma]: Indian freedom fighters were, you see yourself as a local people fighting this colonial force.
[Amit Varma]: And the fact is that they have been promised self determination for so many years.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, and of course, the meaning of that term has changed for them what self
[Amit Varma]: determination really means.
[Amit Varma]: How do we reconcile that question, like so far, we've discussed Kashmir as a geopolitical
[Amit Varma]: issue between India and Pakistan, and, you know, as a political issue within India, where
[Amit Varma]: all this other politics is playing out?
[Amit Varma]: What about the moral question that the people sort of also have a right to decide their
[Amit Varma]: own destiny?
[Guest]: Well, I think, at some level, you know, that is the fundamental question, right?
[Guest]: Which is to say that, is it really possible for any government in any part of the world
[Guest]: to be able to impose its will on ordinary people over very long periods of time?
[Guest]: And I think much of modern history suggests that that is unlikely to work in a long term
[Guest]: context, right?
[Guest]: You can do it for some lengths of period, you can maybe do it for very long periods
[Guest]: of time, but unlikely that it's going to continue forever, right?
[Guest]: I mean, in that sense, there is no permanence to that kind of dominance, and so on.
[Guest]: Now, as far as Kashmir itself is concerned, see, we have gone through so many sort of
[Guest]: stages of thinking about how do we refer to the will of the people, almost from the moment
[Guest]: when this pledge was made that in Junagadh, Hyderabad, Kashmir, we are going to refer
[Guest]: to the will of the people, you wanted to know what that would be.
[Guest]: Should it be a referendum?
[Guest]: Should it be a plebiscite?
[Guest]: Those are technically somewhat different things.
[Guest]: Should it be a Indian referendum or an Indian plebiscite or should it be internationally
[Guest]: supervised?
[Guest]: Right?
[Guest]: There was that question.
[Guest]: Later on, there was this question of saying that is the Constituent Assembly of JNK, which
[Guest]: we have assured under our constitution, and that constitution is that a form of self-determination?
[Guest]: Now, you said earlier that, you know, the Kashmiri people themselves were never asked.
[Guest]: But in a sense, that is broadly true of the Indian constitution also.
[Guest]: It was elected on a limited franchise, the Constituent Assembly, and the constitution
[Guest]: was never ratified by the people, though you could think of the first general election
[Guest]: in 1951 as broadly a ratification of the constitution, but it was not technically not a ratification.
[Guest]: So my only point is to say that just because that was not done, it does not mean that,
[Guest]: you know, everything had to be only solved by means of plebiscites and referenda.
[Guest]: Right?
[Guest]: I mean, there could have been other ways of sort of doing those things.
[Guest]: Then we had a constitution coming in, but that constitution has been under article 370
[Guest]: eroded.
[Guest]: And, you know, Indian leaders starting with Jawaharlal Nehru have somewhat openly accepted
[Guest]: that they were doing it.
[Guest]: Right?
[Guest]: When Gulzarilal Nanda says you've driven a tunnel through this stuff.
[Guest]: Very good.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: And we are proudly announcing that we are doing it.
[Guest]: It's not something that we are trying to hide as a fact.
[Guest]: Subsequently, in 1965, when Prime Minister Lal Bahadur Shastri was the thing, something
[Guest]: even worse was done.
[Guest]: The state JNK state government effectively was converted from a national conference government
[Guest]: to a Congress Party government.
[Guest]: And they amended the Kashmir constitution using their provisions of constitution amendment
[Guest]: to make the elected Sadre Riyasat into a governor appointed by the center and also imported
[Guest]: provisions under article 370 for imposition of president's rule.
[Guest]: Just imagine a total fundamental change in the way that that thing happened.
[Guest]: The agreement between Indira Gandhi and Sheikh Abdullah, which led to Sheikh Abdullah's return
[Guest]: to power in 1975, again was on the premise that a number of powers which were vested
[Guest]: in the JNK constitution would be the same.
[Guest]: For instance, one of the key clauses of that Sheikh Abdullah-Indira Gandhi agreement was
[Guest]: that the JNK constitution could not in any way legislate on the powers of the governor
[Guest]: of the state.
[Guest]: So effectively, you first made the governor an instrument of the center.
[Guest]: You said through the instrument of the center, president's rule can be imposed.
[Guest]: Then you say that the state's constitution cannot touch the governor at all.
[Guest]: So effectively, you have sort of eroded the autonomy of the state in every conceivable
[Guest]: way.
[Guest]: In 1986, when the state was under governor's rule, Mr. Jagmohan was the governor at that
[Guest]: point of time and Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi was there, they extended further provisions
[Guest]: of the Indian constitution without any reference to anyone saying the governor is there to
[Guest]: give concurrence.
[Guest]: We know from historical records that even the law secretary of India had raised a sort
[Guest]: of red flag saying that this is a dubious sort of move because the governor cannot stand
[Guest]: it.
[Guest]: But we said we will do it.
[Guest]: So at every point of time, therefore, as you are saying, we have promised different kinds
[Guest]: of self-determination or given them a different opportunity to say that, listen, we will allow
[Guest]: you to have elections.
[Guest]: Then in 1987, elections are rigged, right?
[Guest]: So it is in that context that I think we have to understand the despair of the Kashmiris,
[Guest]: which is to say that, you know, what is it that India says that we can take at face value
[Guest]: or we can believe that India will stand by it because they are the stronger power.
[Guest]: You know, there was a very nice article in the Hindu by Suhasini Haider, you know, she
[Guest]: quoted to Thukdi D's as saying that the strong can do what they can and the weak must endure
[Guest]: what they must, right?
[Guest]: From the Malian dialogue.
[Guest]: Now, if that is the position of the Kashmiris, then their despair is understandable because
[Guest]: we have promised them many, many things in different ways.
[Guest]: And what has now been done in a sense, not just is injurious to their thing, it adds
[Guest]: insult to injury because now you're told that you don't even have the status of a state.
[Guest]: One of the largest princely states of India has not only been absorbed into the Indian
[Guest]: Union, you know, whatever, even if you think abolishing Article 370 means any greater integration,
[Guest]: I don't believe there was any such further thing happening.
[Guest]: But you reduced it to the state of Union Territory, and you held out a hope to them that they
[Guest]: can rise up to the state level, if in the future, they sort of behave appropriately.
[Guest]: Now, I think, you know, that is going to be a matter of deep resentment in Kashmir.
[Guest]: We will have to see how future politics plays out.
[Guest]: Nobody knows.
[Amit Varma]: So I'll come to my second of three questions, sort of by also addressing what people might
[Amit Varma]: say about self-determination being a slippery slope, for example, somebody might ask, what
[Amit Varma]: if the people of Andheri want to be independent, where do you stop?
[Amit Varma]: And what if the people of Warsaw then want to be independent from Andheri, which they
[Amit Varma]: should?
[Amit Varma]: And my response to that would by and large be that, I think, even as far as disaffection
[Amit Varma]: of the Kashmiri people is concerned, they've been based on shifting sands, they have not
[Amit Varma]: always been pissed off at the Union.
[Amit Varma]: And in the rest of the country, what we have done is there is some semblance of good governance
[Amit Varma]: and the rule of law and so on and so forth.
[Amit Varma]: And the people can actually feel that okay, we are in a democracy, we have some chance,
[Amit Varma]: we are not unequal compared to the other citizens of this great democracy.
[Amit Varma]: But what has happened in Kashmir is that the way the state has behaved is with the people
[Amit Varma]: is very different from say, Warsaw or Andheri.
[Amit Varma]: I wrote an essay a while back, which I'll also link from the show notes, which sort
[Amit Varma]: of took off on a lot of counterinsurgency literature I was reading and also David Devadas's
[Amit Varma]: book, The Generation of Rage in Kashmir, which I'll also link from the show notes where
[Amit Varma]: Devadas's point was that by 2007, basically a new generation had come up in Kashmir and
[Amit Varma]: it was much more hopeful and aspirational, and so on and wanting to integrate with India.
[Amit Varma]: But then the continued brutality by the state sort of, you know, caused them to rise up
[Amit Varma]: against the state and just made things much worse.
[Amit Varma]: Not the fault of this government alone, starting from the UPA government 2007-2008 onwards,
[Amit Varma]: it got much worse.
[Amit Varma]: And that brings me to a question of strategy on which again, you are an expert is that
[Amit Varma]: what we have sort of learned from counterinsurgency literature, you know, right from Mao and T.E.
[Amit Varma]: Lawrence's Seven Pillars of Wisdom and David Galula's books, is that if you are going to
[Amit Varma]: tackle an insurgency, you don't do it with brute force, you do it with, you know, an
[Amit Varma]: equation someone once came up with, which is 20% military, 80% political.
[Amit Varma]: And the key there is that you have to have the local people on your side, so that the
[Amit Varma]: insurgency doesn't have a place to hide.
[Amit Varma]: And what instead we have done in Kashmir is instead of providing good governance and getting
[Amit Varma]: the local people on your side, we have instead alienated the common man far more, made the
[Amit Varma]: common person sympathetic to freedom fighters and terrorists, whatever one chooses to call
[Amit Varma]: them.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore made sure that even if we have Kashmir with us, we don't have the Kashmiri
[Amit Varma]: with us.
[Guest]: What are your thoughts on this?
[Guest]: Well, I think that has been a challenge even before the insurgency began.
[Guest]: And I think in some ways, the insurgency began as a response to this feeling that normal
[Guest]: ways of, you know, dealing with India in normal politics, elections, negotiations are not
[Guest]: going to do.
[Guest]: So that's how an insurgent sort of group began.
[Guest]: And as you're saying, you know, the fact that the Indian government also sort of responded
[Guest]: with an iron fist meant that, you know, the local population then continued to support
[Guest]: the insurgency to varying degrees over periods of time.
[Guest]: As you're rightly saying, there have been periods when Kashmiris have been more or less
[Guest]: hopeful.
[Guest]: You know, I'm not in a position to say whether in 2007, there was a new generation of Kashmiris
[Amit Varma]: who are more hopeful or not.
[Amit Varma]: That is Devadas's claim.
[Guest]: And it's very interesting.
[Guest]: Yeah, it's an interesting claim.
[Guest]: But I think what is empirically true on in a sense, superficially, you know, you can
[Guest]: sort of immediately sort of take it as granted that there is a generation of Kashmiris, which
[Guest]: came of age by the late 2000s, who had practically grown up in the shadow of the insurgency.
[Guest]: At least, you know, the generations which preceded them knew something of what life
[Guest]: was before the insurgency began.
[Guest]: And this, you know, very strong degree of sort of security response, which, you know,
[Guest]: is a consequence of the insurgency.
[Guest]: And again, I wouldn't want to sort of carry a brief for the insurgency in Kashmir, because,
[Guest]: you know, the fact is that the Indian Army's presence was not as overweening in Kashmir
[Guest]: before the insurgency began.
[Guest]: It is a response to what the insurgency is.
[Guest]: And the insurgency has also brutalized the people of Kashmir.
[Guest]: It is not a unilateral sort of brutalization, which has been done by the Indian Army.
[Amit Varma]: There are many unpalatable elements of the insurgency, such as recent Islamism, the jihadism
[Amit Varma]: that has come in.
[Amit Varma]: So I'm not trying to pass a judgment in as an army good insurgency bad, or the other
[Guest]: way around.
[Guest]: Absolutely.
[Guest]: No, I fully agree.
[Guest]: But all I'm trying to say is that for the ordinary Kashmiri, they have had to deal with
[Guest]: the consequences of living in an environment which was dominated by an insurgency counter
[Guest]: insurgency dynamic.
[Guest]: Right?
[Guest]: It is not a straightforward question of saying that this is just a pure sort of Israeli occupation
[Guest]: of the West Bank.
[Guest]: There is no insurgency happening in the West Bank.
[Guest]: Right?
[Guest]: I mean, there is a very different situation out here, which in some ways much worse possibly.
[Guest]: Which is why I'm saying that for a generation of Kashmiris, what they have grown up is under
[Guest]: the shadow of the gun, whether it is wielded by the insurgents or by the security forces.
[Guest]: And that obviously has huge psychological implications for the way that they think about
[Guest]: their future, about what they want, what they are willing to risk.
[Guest]: You know, in the last couple of years, we have seen newspaper reporting.
[Guest]: I have not been to Kashmir, but I've been reading newspaper reports, suggesting that
[Guest]: people are actually preventing the security forces from carrying out operations by forming
[Guest]: human shields.
[Guest]: And, you know, actually sort of risking death effectively, because they can get, you know,
[Guest]: they may be collateral damage in an operation, ongoing operation, if you come in between
[Guest]: and so on.
[Guest]: Now, all of that suggests a degree of despair, which is very high.
[Guest]: And I think the challenge for us is now to say that, listen, how are we going to deal
[Guest]: with that?
[Guest]: That is the human element, and that is also the moral element.
[Guest]: Because at the end of the day, you know, there is this famous line from the Vietnam War,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: I mean, it may be an apocryphal story where an American sort of Marines captain, you know,
[Guest]: is interviewed by some news agencies immediately after the taking over of some village which
[Guest]: has been strafed and bombed and they've captured it and says, you know, what, why did you have
[Guest]: to do sort of, you know, use so much force?
[Guest]: He says, we had to destroy the village in order to save it.
[Guest]: That is a question we have to ask ourselves.
[Guest]: Are we going to destroy people in order to save them?
[Guest]: It's a mistake that we made in so many other guises in the past, right?
[Guest]: We believe that in order to affirm our secular value, we have to keep somebody else in subjection.
[Guest]: Then how does it mean an affirmation of any democratic values?
[Guest]: So I think the question of means and ends, which is rightly posed, is today, I think,
[Guest]: an even more urgent one, because the insurgency, at least in the short term, is likely to get
[Guest]: some kind of a flip, because, you know, Pakistan will feel emboldened to sort of fish in troubled
[Guest]: waters, you know, there may be more disaffected youth within Kashmir who may be willing to
[Guest]: take up the gun, or they may not be, but let's assume that the insurgency and counter insurgency
[Guest]: dynamic is not going away anytime soon, just because you abolished Article 370, that's
[Amit Varma]: not going away.
[Amit Varma]: No, and the point of my question was also to say, like you used to phrase the shadow
[Amit Varma]: of the gun.
[Amit Varma]: And the thing is, the fact that there are so many young people living under the shadow
[Amit Varma]: of the gun, who have seen their 12 year old brothers taken from home and shot in front
[Amit Varma]: of a wall, and so on and so forth, that they've seen all this brutality unfold on their friends
[Amit Varma]: and family, and others, and the point is, the shadow of the gun is actually the worst
[Amit Varma]: way to fight the insurgency, you know, which is a lesson that we've learned over the decades.
[Amit Varma]: And that if the Modi government wanted, it could just fight the insurgency in a very
[Amit Varma]: different way by providing good governance, trying to win the people over.
[Amit Varma]: And that would be far more successful in integrating Kashmir into India in the long run, if they
[Amit Varma]: want to.
[Amit Varma]: Is that kind of understanding not there within the
[Guest]: You know, Amit, let me try and explain what I think they are thinking, right, beyond this
[Guest]: Article 370.
[Guest]: Because there are important sort of glimpses we got of their reasoning behind this move
[Guest]: from the Prime Minister's speeches, from the Home Minister's speeches, which I think,
[Guest]: as analysts and observers, we should take seriously, right.
[Guest]: In fact, I think in some ways, the Prime Minister concurs with what you said, which is that governance
[Guest]: has not been good in Kashmir.
[Guest]: In fact, he said in his speech, that ever since the imposition of governor's rule, we
[Guest]: have managed to do many more schemes, etc, etc.
[Guest]: Now, whether that's an empirically true fact or not, and to what extent all of that is
[Guest]: done is a different question.
[Guest]: But he shares this assumption that the existing status quo has not delivered any governance.
[Amit Varma]: But things have actually become worse in the last five years.
[Guest]: Maybe.
[Guest]: As I said, I mean, you know, let's say, but all I'm trying to say is that they will share
[Guest]: the diagnosis in some way, right, and they just have a different solution to the problem.
[Guest]: And as I sort of read their sort of speeches and explanations, I think the way that they
[Guest]: are thinking about it is to say that what Kashmir needs is actually a new kind of a
[Guest]: political dispensation altogether, that, you know, and the Prime Minister has spoken many
[Guest]: times about the three families which have looted Kashmir and so on, right, I mean, you
[Guest]: would have recalled from his speech.
[Guest]: So I think they now have come to a conclusion that we need a new generation of leaders in
[Guest]: Kashmir, who will be willing to work with India, and can be sort of, you know, can sort
[Guest]: of pursue an agenda in tandem with New Delhi, which would be very different from that in
[Guest]: the past.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: And in order to do that, we have to create a totally new political context.
[Guest]: And which is why we started the level of panchayats, because we are hoping that a bottoms up sort
[Guest]: of process of elections, etc, will force up new leaders to come.
[Guest]: And those leaders will have to operate under a very different context.
[Guest]: Because now, the main challenge for Kashmir is to get back statehood, which has been promised
[Guest]: to them, at least implicitly, from Union Territory status.
[Guest]: And now the political lines of Jammu Kashmir, the new Union Territory, are going to be drawn
[Guest]: in different ways.
[Guest]: And it's not very clear that the Kashmiris will have the kind of political dominance
[Guest]: that they had in the previous dispensation, right.
[Guest]: So a new politics is being created, which I think is one of their stated intentions.
[Guest]: And the claim is that that politics will lead to newer forms of dealing with this problem,
[Guest]: which will be much better than what we have tried in the past.
[Guest]: Now I think to be fair, we should grant them that this is the reconstruction.
[Guest]: Now whether this works or not, I myself feel a little skeptical, because, you know, as
[Guest]: a historian, unfortunately, I am stuck in the past, right, people like me are told you're
[Guest]: stuck in the past.
[Guest]: Yes, I am stuck in the past.
[Guest]: Because that's I studied the past for this thing.
[Guest]: But when I look at leaders as stalwart as Sheikh Abdullah, you know, who, whether in
[Guest]: 1952, after the Delhi Agreement, or in 1975, after his agreement with Indira Gandhi, felt
[Guest]: that he could not really sort of sell the same agreement to his people.
[Guest]: If stalwart leaders like that felt about agreements of autonomy, is it realistic to assume that
[Guest]: there will be new leaders who will come out of the situation in Kashmir, who will say
[Guest]: that no, actually, statehood, you know, is the main sort of objective for us, we should
[Guest]: be happy with what is there.
[Guest]: Maybe they will.
[Guest]: I'm not saying that it is impossible.
[Guest]: But as a student of history, it seems to me that there are limits to the plasticity of
[Guest]: politics in Kashmir.
[Guest]: It is not infinitely malleable.
[Guest]: There are certain things and that is the nature of every democratic process.
[Guest]: And it is not just India, but any country which has dealt, you know, you look at Americans,
[Guest]: you know, they wanted someone like Hamid Karzai to be in Afghanistan.
[Guest]: But Hamid Karzai then turns out to be a very difficult actor for you to deal with because
[Guest]: his incentives are not to toe your line all the time, or to do exactly what you want.
[Guest]: You may both want the same thing, which is overall development, etc.
[Guest]: But his idea of how that has to be accomplished, cuts across with yours.
[Guest]: Same thing happened with Ingo Dindium in South Vietnam back in the day, right?
[Guest]: So I don't see, therefore, that democratic politics is as capable of being shaped by
[Guest]: grand designs, as we seem to assume.
[Guest]: But we have made a start, it's a, it's a start, which has torn up the past, broken away from
[Guest]: it in a very dramatic way.
[Guest]: Even if it has used the same means that were used in the past, but I think still this is
[Guest]: a step, an order of magnitude, different kind of decision which has been taken, we'll have
[Amit Varma]: to see how it plays out.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, the future is all unknown unknowns.
[Amit Varma]: And for my last question, I want to shift the context a little bit, where I am going
[Amit Varma]: to say, let's not talk about how constitution or non constitutional 370 is.
[Amit Varma]: Let's not even talk about the Kashmir itself, how that issue has evolved through the years
[Amit Varma]: and all the politics and geopolitics about that.
[Amit Varma]: Let's look at the 370 within the context of the fact that this was one of the key demands
[Amit Varma]: of a resurgent Hindu right, which is now on the political ascendant.
[Amit Varma]: Some would say it's a coming together of culture and politics in a sense.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, their key demands were things like cow slaughter, 370, these have been the
[Amit Varma]: signature issues which they've used through the years.
[Amit Varma]: And you now see all of these playing out in a in on a bigger scale where cow slaughter
[Amit Varma]: is again an issue, you have lynchings going up in the country.
[Amit Varma]: Now they've done 370, maybe they'll build the temple next, who knows?
[Amit Varma]: What direction do you see this country broadly going in?
[Amit Varma]: And this is again, you know, outside the issue of Kashmir, because like I said, I think what
[Amit Varma]: happened on August 5th is more than just about Kashmir is also about India.
[Guest]: Yeah, you know, historians make a very bad astrologers.
[Amit Varma]: So you know, I have no means of dividing where we are going down.
[Amit Varma]: What's the best case scenario and worst case scenario for the next 10 years?
[Guest]: You know, honestly, I, I don't think I'm very well placed to answer that question.
[Guest]: But let me take a stab at giving a serious answer to your first question.
[Guest]: Now, you're right that, you know, we are at a in a different kind of a political situation
[Guest]: where there is a new political party, which has emerged as the hegemonic force by hegemonic
[Guest]: as a force, which has the consent of a large number of electorate.
[Guest]: And especially if you look at the last election in the Hindi speaking states, the BJP has
[Guest]: clearly emerged as a hegemonic power.
[Guest]: And they believe that these are issues on which they have campaigned.
[Guest]: And again, they're right in saying so, and that they have a mandate, therefore, to do
[Guest]: it.
[Guest]: And that is clearly sort of understandable, it is legitimate.
[Guest]: But as we know, with any liberal democracy of the kind that we are, the things like the
[Guest]: Constitution exists for a certain reason, which is basically to sort of ensure that
[Guest]: democratic majoritarianism cannot upturn the fundamentals of the state.
[Guest]: That is what the Constitution's, you know, so called, you know, function is.
[Guest]: Now, if, if we are going to overturn the procedural norms of using the Constitution for various
[Guest]: ends, simply because of claiming majoritarian legitimation, then I think we are at an inflection
[Guest]: point.
[Guest]: We have been in a similar inflection point in the past, there used to be huge tussles
[Guest]: between what the state could do, the government could do vis-a-vis the Constitution back in
[Guest]: the Indira Gandhi period, which has then led to this doctrine of the basic structure, which
[Guest]: came out of the Keshavand Bharti sort of, you know, case.
[Guest]: Now, the question for us is whether now we are doing things where another more clever
[Guest]: way of using the provisions of the Constitution to do these kinds of things is possible, and
[Guest]: whether the courts are actually going to uphold, which is why I think it is going to be interesting
[Guest]: to see how the courts deal with these legal challenges.
[Guest]: Because the courts do not sit in the heaven, they sit in this country.
[Guest]: And they have to also take into account various other kinds of factors as they do it.
[Guest]: Like public opinion?
[Guest]: I don't know whether they do.
[Guest]: I'm not a constitutional scholar.
[Guest]: But I would imagine that in the past, if you look at it, I mean, courts have always not
[Guest]: necessarily taken on the executive in a very direct way when it comes to this thing.
[Guest]: But I think what has happened in this month will raise a series of legal questions, which
[Guest]: are at least of as much importance as the sort of landmark cases in the Supreme Court
[Guest]: starting in the late 60s running through to the mid 70s happened.
[Guest]: And as I see it, you know, there is a tussle always in any country between democracy and
[Guest]: constitutionalism, right?
[Guest]: I mean, these are not necessarily compatible values, right?
[Guest]: And we have to see how this judgment plays out, in a sense, how this balance, what kind
[Guest]: of new equilibrium do we arrive at?
[Guest]: If we are going to arrive at an equilibrium that listen, majoritarian legitimization is
[Guest]: sufficient to override all other kinds of things, and everything is up for grabs, then
[Guest]: possibly we are looking at a very, very different way of doing things.
[Guest]: In the past, again, this is not the first time that we are in a situation like this.
[Guest]: Mrs. Gandhi attempted many such things during the emergency.
[Guest]: But post the emergency, many of those things were also repealed, right?
[Guest]: We saw many of those constitutional amendments sort of being repealed, and so on.
[Guest]: Now, I'm not trying to suggest that we are in any comparable situation.
[Guest]: But all I'm trying to say is that the questions are similar, which is about how do we go about
[Guest]: using the provisions of the Constitution?
[Guest]: What is the relationship between a majoritarian affirmation in elections, and the kinds of
[Guest]: constitutional changes that we can bring about?
[Guest]: And what does this mean for the country as a whole?
[Amit Varma]: And also just to sort of take that thought forward and throw this at you at the same
[Amit Varma]: time is that one fundamental way in which this tussle, as you use the term currently,
[Amit Varma]: is different from what Indira Gandhi did was Indira Gandhi was, as far as I can see, driven
[Amit Varma]: essentially by the will to power.
[Amit Varma]: And whatever changes in the Constitution she made was driven by that.
[Amit Varma]: But there is a deeper philosophical dispute here in the legitimacy of this Constitution
[Amit Varma]: and the kind of constitutionalism that we have, where a lot of Hindutva right wing thinkers
[Amit Varma]: have, for example, argued in the past that this is a constitution made by liberal elites
[Amit Varma]: and doesn't represent what the people actually believe in or stand for.
[Amit Varma]: So when you talk about, for example, you use the phrases democratic majoritarianism shaking
[Amit Varma]: the foundations of the state, I think what the argument from the Hindu right would be
[Amit Varma]: that the foundations of the state are the wrong foundations, that they don't agree with
[Amit Varma]: the definition of constitutionalism that you and I would agree with that it's essentially
[Amit Varma]: the Constitution has to be a check on the power of the state and has to protect the
[Amit Varma]: people against the state, but they would not necessarily agree with that.
[Amit Varma]: And in that tussle, who is to say that whether their vision of what the Constitution should
[Amit Varma]: be is more legitimate, or our vision, which is still the vision of liberal elites?
[Guest]: No, I agree with you that there is no reason to assume that, you know, a group of people,
[Guest]: maybe a majority of people in this country may have a very different vision of what the
[Guest]: Constitution should be.
[Guest]: But all I'm trying to say is that, if you want to reach that vision, you cannot do it
[Guest]: through the existing constitutional means, you need to convene another Constituent Assembly
[Guest]: and do it.
[Guest]: That is how you can supersede the existing Constitution, because the existing Constitution
[Guest]: lays certain kinds of provisions in here, including the doctrine of basic structure,
[Guest]: which has now become I think, again, I'm not a constitutional scholar, but as a historian,
[Guest]: to the extent that I've read and understood these things, it has become a fairly well
[Guest]: defined doctrine, which is actually applicable in many, used in many other countries as well,
[Guest]: in dealing with these situations, right.
[Guest]: And in a sense, should also incidentally be applicable to the Constitution of the JNK
[Guest]: state itself, who's not only basic structure, but entire structure has been evacuated.
[Guest]: Exactly.
[Guest]: So, that's why I'm saying that there are many interesting and important constitutional questions
[Guest]: at stake here, which will be discussed and the courts will come to some kind of a judgment
[Guest]: on these questions.
[Guest]: So, I do not for once deny that people may want to have a different Constitution.
[Guest]: All I'm trying to say is that we are in a currently in one constitutional regime.
[Guest]: You may feel that, listen, this constitutional regime is the wrong one for this country to
[Guest]: have.
[Guest]: Though I, I'm hard pressed to say that it is done by some bunch of liberal elites alone,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: I think that is not the case to all of us, especially our readers, you know, our listeners,
[Guest]: I would recommend a book by Rohit Dey, which is about the people's constitution, about
[Guest]: how very ordinary people in India, as soon as the Constitution came into effect, use
[Guest]: the provisions of the Constitution to secure their own rights, to suggest that this is
[Guest]: a document of by and for liberal elites is I think, a travesty of history.
[Amit Varma]: I'll get that book from the show notes.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: So, I may have got the title of the book.
[Guest]: I think that's what it's called the people's constitution.
[Guest]: I think it's a very important book.
[Guest]: I think it's one of the most important books written about the history of the Indian constitution
[Guest]: making process and what it meant.
[Guest]: And I think it fundamentally belies this proposition that it was a document for liberal elites
[Guest]: and made by liberal elites.
[Guest]: I freely concede that it was a, you know, a constitution, which kind of was made on
[Guest]: limited franchise and so on.
[Guest]: But to suggest therefore that it is ipso facto illegitimate or that it is under representative
[Guest]: of this country, I think is a travesty.
[Guest]: I don't think that is true.
[Guest]: Of course, the, you know, any group of people who believe that they have the numbers and
[Guest]: the political power to want to bring about a new constitutional regime are entirely at
[Guest]: liberty to do so.
[Guest]: But it cannot be done within the frameworks and contours of the existing system.
[Guest]: You need to have a total revolution, approve all of this stuff and take us to a totally
[Guest]: different one.
[Guest]: I'd imagine, you know, that is an enterprise about which a lot of people will have some
[Guest]: questions to ask.
[Amit Varma]: I can't make out if that's a hopeful note to end on or not.
[Amit Varma]: But at least you and I are on the same page as regards to the desirability of this constitution,
[Amit Varma]: whether we are liberal elites or not is another question entirely.
[Amit Varma]: Thanks so much for coming on the show.
[Amit Varma]: It's always great to talk to you.
[Amit Varma]: Great to be here.
[Unknown]: Thank you.
[Amit Varma]: If you enjoyed listening to this episode, head on over to your nearest online or offline
[Amit Varma]: bookstore and buy War and Peace in Modern India by Srinath Raghavan, which is a fascinating
[Amit Varma]: account of how the Indian Union became a union.
[Amit Varma]: You can also follow Srinath on Twitter as Srinath Raghava 3.
[Amit Varma]: You can follow me at Amit Verma, A-M-I-T-V-A-R-M-A.
[Amit Varma]: You can browse past episodes of the Seen and the Unseen at seenunseen.in, thinkpragati.com
[Amit Varma]: and ivmpodcast.com.
[Amit Varma]: The Seen and the Unseen is supported by the Takshashila Institution, an independent center
[Amit Varma]: for research and education in public policy.
[Amit Varma]: Takshashila offers 12-week courses in public policy, technology policy and strategic studies
[Amit Varma]: for both full-time students and working professionals.
[Amit Varma]: Visit takshashila.org.in for more details.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you for listening.
[Unknown]: I'll see you next time.
[Unknown]: Okay, probably not in the right company.
[Unknown]: I mean, Don Bradman is Australian.
[Unknown]: But it's called Cyrus Says.
[Unknown]: A wonderful show about everything.
[Unknown]: Find the show on the IBM podcast app,
[Unknown]: ibmpodcast.com, or wherever you listen to podcasts.
[Unknown]: Cyrus Says is brought to you by Storytel.